1077-2626 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2868531, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
Augmented Reality Interface Design Approaches  
for Goal-directed and Stimulus-driven Driving Tasks 
Coleman Merenda*, Hyungil Kim, Kyle Tanous, Joseph L. Gabbard,  
Blake Feichtl, Teruhisa Misu, and Chihiro Suga 
Abstract— The automotive industry is rapidly developing new in-vehicle technologies that can provide drivers with information to aid 
awareness and promote quicker response times. Particularly, vehicles with augmented reality (AR) graphics delivered via head-up 
displays (HUDs) are nearing mainstream commercial feasibility and will be widely implemented over the next decade.  Though AR 
graphics have been shown to provide tangible benefits to drivers in scenarios like forward collision warnings and navigation, they also 
create many new perceptual and sensory issues for drivers. For some time now, designers have focused on increasing the realism 
and quality of virtual graphics delivered via HUDs, and recently have begun testing more advanced 3D HUD systems that deliver 
volumetric spatial information to drivers. However, the realization of volumetric graphics adds further complexity to the design and 
delivery of AR cues, and moreover, parameters in this new design space must be clearly and operationally defined and explored. In 
this work, we present two user studies that examine how driver performance and visual attention are affected when using fixed and 
animated AR HUD interface design approaches in driving scenarios that require top-down and bottom-up cognitive processing. 
Results demonstrate that animated design approaches can produce some driving gains (e.g., in goal-directed navigation tasks) but 
often come at the cost of response time and distance. Our discussion yields AR HUD design recommendations and challenges some 
of the existing assumptions of world-fixed conformal graphic approaches to design. 
Index Terms— Mixed-reality, augmented reality, driving, head-up displays
 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Augmented reality’s (AR) presence in the automotive market has 
grown considerably in the last decade.  Despite the fact that many 
questions and challenges remain for applications of AR-based 
information systems, vehicles that support AR information delivery 
via head-up display (HUD) technology have now firmly entered the 
market and are being sold on a large scale consumer basis.  The past 
5 years alone have seen a continuous growth of vehicles equipped with 
HUDs, and the market is expected to continue to multiply by a factor 
of seven through 2020 to an estimated 9.1 million units [1]. A HUD 
system is generally defined as any transparent display that projects 
visual information into drivers’ forward-looking visual field [2], but 
most HUDs today function by using optical reflection to project 
information into drivers’ field of view via glass or mirror combiner 
[3]. While the vast majority of current HUD-equipped automobiles 
provide only basic information to drivers (e.g. vehicle speed and time), 
several vehicle setups with more complex functionality have recently 
emerged. For example, Volvo and BMW now market AR HUDs that 
deliver more contextual information such as screen-fixed navigation 
aids like instructions, lane departure warnings, parking space 
proximity, and collision warnings [4, 5]. Additionally, third-party 
sellers such as Hudway and Garmin now offer HUD technology 
packages that host AR graphics via mobile-based applications [6], 
meaning that even cars without manufacturer-provided HUDs may 
still be adapted into AR integrated systems. With this clear growth of 
the AR sector in automotive manufacturing, AR HUD designers have 
become more pressed to address the critical issues surrounding the 
development of best interface design practices and their relation to 
driver attention and safety. 
In this spirit, the work described herein contributes to the body of 
augmented reality and transportation knowledge by providing: (1) a 
characterization of AR HUD interface elements, (2) delineation of 
goal-directed and stimulus-driven task scenarios to be supported by 
AR HUD graphics, (3) two outdoor, on-road user studies that examine 
multiple AR HUD designs within different driving scenarios, (4) a 
novel means to assess the effects of designs on human performance 
that differentiates visual capture from visual guidance, and, (5) AR 
HUD interface design recommendations for future consideration. 
2 RELATED WORK 
2.1 
Benefits and Challenges of AR Systems in Driving 
The potential that AR systems have to improve driving performance 
and attention while on the road when successfully implemented, is 
well known. Recently, AR-based displays have been hailed as a better 
means to deliver information to drivers while still maintaining lower 
levels of mental workload [7]. When comparing general driving 
performance via HUD to a traditional head-down display (HDD) (i.e. 
a visual display mounted in the center of a vehicle’s dash), clear 
advantages emerge. For example, use of a HUD over an HDD allowed 
drivers to keep their gaze on the road longer, leading to faster reaction 
times, improved task performance, and less mental stress [8]. AR 
HUD displays are also able to better mitigate dangers resulting from 
drivers diverting their view from the road when compared to 
traditional head-down displays [9]. Active in-vehicle information 
systems have been shown to help reduce driver task load by presenting 
real-time information regarding routes, delays, congestion, and 
warnings of potential hazards [10, 11]. Taken in sum, these findings 
bolster the promise of spatially co-locating AR graphics with the 
forward roadway to mitigate the known dangers of divided attention, 
afford faster visual processing of information at hand [12], and 
empower drivers to devote more time and mental workload to the 
primary task of driving.  
     The described gains in attention can easily translate into significant 
performance improvements when applied to specific driving 
scenarios. For example, when navigating, directions presented via AR 
HUDs can reduce the ambiguity of instructions by directly pointing 
• Coleman Merenda is with Virginia Tech.E-mail: cjm120@vt.edu 
• Hyungil Kim is with Virginia Tech. E-mail: hci.kim@vt.edu 
• Kyle Tanous is with Virginia Tech. E-mail: ktanous@vt.edu 
• Joseph L. Gabbard is with Virginia Tech. E-mail: jgabbard@vt.edu  
• Blake Feichtl is with Virginia Tech. E-mail: blake96@vt.edu 
• Chihiro Suga is with Honda Research Institute, USA. E-mail: 
CSuga@hra.com 
• Teruhisa Misu is with Honda Research Institute, USA. E-mail: 
tmisu@honda-ri.com 
• Manuscript received xx xxx. 201x; accepted xx xxx. 201x. Date of  
Publication xx xxx. 201x; date of current version xx xxx. 201x. 
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send 
e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org. 
Digital Object Identifier: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx/. 


1077-2626 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2868531, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
out intersections and turn locations in the context of what drivers 
actually see [13]. In a study on cognitive mapping, drivers using 
pathway style cues projected via HUD in conjunction with traditional 
top-view navigation (i.e. GPS) experienced reduced navigational 
errors and distraction measures as compared to using the top-view 
alone [14]. In more urgent situations such as collision scenarios, 
drivers have shown preference to augmented views of the road over 
conventional map views [15]. However, multiple sources of in-vehicle 
information can also add to drivers’ cognitive load by increasing 
divided attention in cases where task complexity becomes too great to 
easily handle. Though past work has argued that AR-enabled cues can 
further guide driver’s attention to localize threats earlier [12], others 
have argued that AR cues do not actually improve the detection of 
cues related to a maneuver, but rather only change allocation of visual 
attention by making fixations more numerous and less task-specific 
[16].  Several other key issues encountered when using AR systems 
continue to hinder their effective use. For example, individuals 
operating a HUD-equipped vehicle tend to suffer from both 1) 
cognitive/attention capture (i.e. unconsciously shifting attention from 
surrounding world towards the HUD visualization) and 2) perceptual 
tunneling (i.e. excessively narrowing their peripheral awareness) [17]. 
AR graphics are also frequently affected by the interaction between 
real-world backgrounds and natural lighting, and, in outdoor situations 
where both conditions are dynamically changing, can detrimentally 
impact users’ discriminability of graphics and perception of cue color 
and meaning [18, 19]. 
2.2 
Technical Challenges of HUDs 
The degree to which AR visuals are able to be effectively used in an 
automotive system is significantly impacted by the means in which 
they are presented. The level of discretion AR HUD interface 
designers are given to deliver information to drivers is to a large 
degree still constrained by the limits of HUD technology. In the past, 
research has pointed to design and usability limitations imposed by 
low screen resolution, low luminance levels, and a limited field of 
view (FOV) [20]. Though the FOV available on HUDs is expected to 
continue growing, current commercially-available HUDs provide 
relatively small FOV (6-15 degrees) as compared to head-worn AR 
displays and thus can display only limited amounts of information 
[21]. Such displays risk being unable to capture driver attention (in the 
event the cue is too small) or risk demanding too much visual attention 
in the event that it is difficult to see or discern important detail in the 
graphic without prolonged glances [20].  
      In terms of interface design, there is contention regarding the most 
effective area to place AR cues in respect to the driver’s forward view.  
On one hand, if virtual images are placed directly in the center of the 
driver’s view, they are likely to occlude imminent information of the 
real world or reduce a driver’s recognition of danger due to an 
excessive presence of virtual information [21].  In fact, symbology 
that is placed within a 5-degree radius of the fovea tends to be 
considered as annoying by drivers and generally ineffective [22]. On 
the other hand, creating fully immersive AR HUDs is not a solution in 
itself, as a larger virtual design canvas will likely draw too much visual 
attention and distract drivers from the forward roadway [21].  To 
present dynamic information that appropriately informs the situation, 
HUDs should generally be placed either directly in front of the driver 
behind the steering wheel or to the right of the steering wheel in the 
tertiary sector, and no more than 30 degrees below a driver's view [21].  
In sum, the limited FOV of current HUDs coupled with HUD 
placement options limit the practical applicability of conformal AR 
HUD graphics – that is, a UI designer can only annotate real-world 
objects that fall within an AR HUD’s limited FOV, which arguably 
are a subset of the most important real-world objects and hazards 
drivers encounter.  Thus, it is likely that conformal approaches to AR 
HUD design are not inherently optimal. Given these many potential 
pitfalls, the placement of AR HUD graphics can quickly become a 
difficult and complex proposition as designers must balance an ability 
to capture and direct drivers’ attention when needed while still 
minimizing distraction from the driving scene. 
2.3 
AR HUD Presentation Methods 
Drivers using AR systems are influenced not only by the system’s 
technical design and limitations thereof but also by the complexity of 
the graphics delivered. Currently, many HUD interface designs 
provide simple fixed-position, two-dimensional graphics (e.g., current 
speed).  These designs thus are limited in their ability to provide depth 
or spatial cues to drivers concerning their environment [23]. Fixed-
focal plane displays with relatively short focal-depths (e.g., 3m) 
increase the cost of attentional switching from HUD to primary task, 
which can result in drivers missing more external hazards, delaying 
responses to external events, or suffering from longer transition times 
to return attention from the HUD to the road scene [24].  
We can define the effort required to shift to and from the physical 
space (i.e. the real world) to the information space (i.e. virtual objects 
overlaid in the world) and back as “cognitive distance”.  This distance 
increases as AR graphics are perceived as less integrated with the 
environment and causes driving to become, in effect, a dual task [14]. 
The cognitive distance can also increase when AR graphics are 
projected at a different focal depth than their real-world referents, 
forcing drivers to accommodate (and shift attention) back and forth 
between two distances. If continued at length, this mismatch can lead 
to eye strain and diminishing ability to correctly perceive and perform 
in-vehicle tasks [25]. More recent work has shown that the inclusion 
of screen-fixed alerts alone does not necessarily provide significant 
reaction gains in gaze behavior towards a road hazard, yet still 
produces improvements in concurrent braking performance [26]. This 
suggests that AR cues that do not provide strong localization may 
encourage fast, but “blind” reactions to threats without actually 
guiding drivers’ attention effectively.   
There is a significant need to explore how driver behavior changes 
as HUD graphic presentation moves from traditional static 2D graphic 
types to a true conformal, or "world-oriented" approach. Gabbard et 
al. [20] helped conceptualize the design space for automotive AR 
interfaces from the users’ point of view: Screen-fixed AR graphics are 
rendered at a fixed location on the HUD and are generally not spatially 
(or perceptually) “attached” to any specific objects in the scene, while 
world-fixed (or conformal) AR graphics are rendered such that they 
are perceived to exist in specific locations in the real world using real-
time geolocation, pose-estimation, and 3D rendering software. In 
simulation, conformal graphics have been shown to direct attention to 
real-world referents that fall within the HUD FOV. For example, a 
study that highlighted pedestrians with gaze-contingent cues helped 
reduce the number of collisions when tested in a simulator [27]. 
However, truly conformal presentation is often difficult to research in 
on-road 
studies 
as 
it 
requires 
a 
technical 
vehicle-based 
implementation that supports real-time, geo-referenced 3D rendering 
of graphics outdoors at speed.  Recent work has shown promising 
results when comparing 3D AR graphics to traditional 2D HUD views, 
including task performance gains [13] as well as faster braking 
reaction time and smoother braking profiles [28, 29].  However, few 
studies yet exist that effectively explore the performance of conformal 
graphics in real-world driving environments. 
3 OBJECTIVES 
Given the limitations of current HUD technology, it is important to 
further explore the extent to which AR interfaces may be leveraged 
without 
requiring 
significant 
or 
unfeasible 
demands 
from 
manufactures. For example, can conformal AR graphics provide 
enough driver performance gains to merit the investment in 
developing more advanced AR HUDs with, for example, larger FOVs 
and multiple focal planes? In examining these questions, we propose 
that available AR HUD interface design approaches not be limited to 
traditional 2D (i.e. screen fixed) or conformal (i.e. world-fixed) cues 
alone. Figure 1 presents a proposed classification for AR HUD 
interface design approaches that distinguish between the behavior of 
an AR HUD interface element and the nature of the space in which 
that element exists. For simplicity, we present the classification as four 
discrete cells, but one can imagine AR HUD designs that fall between 


1077-2626 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2868531, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
these representative endpoints. The behavior dimension is anchored 
on one end by fixed interface elements that are statically positioned at 
a specific location, and on the other by animated interface elements 
that rotate and/or translate through a volume. The orthogonal 
dimension specifies the frame of reference, or location of the 
“designer’s canvas” – that is, the space in which the AR HUD designer 
can position fixed or animated interface elements.  On the screen-
centric end of the continuum, the designer’s canvas is attached to the 
HUD screen, moving through the world along with the driver as if the 
canvas is physically attached (at a distance) to the front of the vehicle. 
On the world-centric end of the continuum, the designer’s canvas is 
attached to the environment (or the world). This set of AR HUD 
interface design approaches contains what is commonly termed 
conformal graphics. 
     Note that this classification of interface design approaches is, by 
design, independent of the AR HUD hardware used to display a given 
AR interface design.  While often presumed true, it is an open question 
whether AR graphics for driving, presented at fixed depth or animated 
through a volume, are better-supported by volumetric head-up 
displays as compared to single, fixed focal plane HUDs. Moreover, 
the interface design approaches represented in the classification are 
not mutually exclusive, and indeed an AR HUD application could very 
well include a meaningful mashup of interface elements from each 
design approach.  To this end, the proposed classification may aid 
future AR HUD researchers and practitioners in organizing their 
interface design work.  
     One of the main objectives of this work is to explore the impact of 
the previously described AR HUD interface design approaches on 
drivers’ performance and behavior when used in representative 
driving scenarios. To this end, we first suggest that a large number of 
representative driving activities fall into one of two categories. (1) In 
goal-directed tasks, drivers are aware and actively seeking a goal-state 
and managing their attention to the means-end of the task. Examples 
of these tasks include navigating from point a to point b, finding a 
parking space, and parallel parking. (2) In stimulus-driven tasks, 
drivers are unaware of an incoming event and must react to stimuli 
accordingly by managing attention by adapting to a change in 
situation. Examples of stimulus-driven tasks include responding to 
vehicles in blind spots, swerving around animals entering the 
roadway, and braking for pedestrians stepping out into the roadway.  
These two scenario categories can be drawn from top-down vs. 
bottom-up human information processing, which are also regarded as 
the two major paths to human comprehension [30]. We believe that 
the cognitive process (and subsequent performance) of drivers may be 
significantly impacted by which mode of processing they are engaging 
in during a task.  Thus, this work aims to examine differences in the 
effectiveness of different AR interface design approaches in goal-
directed (user study 1) and stimulus-driven (user study 2) tasks. 
Through these studies, we aim to answer the following questions: 
 
1. 
Do drivers experience driving performance gains using 
conformal (as compared to traditional HUD) AR interface 
designs? 
2. 
In addition, do drivers experience visual attention gains 
when using conformal (as compared to traditional HUD) 
AR interface designs? 
3. 
Given that world-fixed, conformal approaches may not 
always be feasible, practical or desirable, to what extent can 
other design approaches that use A) screen-based frames of 
reference, and B) dynamic conformal cues, leverage similar 
gains in driving performance and visual attention? 
4 STUDY 1: GOAL DIRECTED NAVIGATION 
In the first user study, we were interested in comparing animated AR 
interface designs to traditional screen-fixed as well as world-fixed 
conformal designs within the context of a goal-directed task. We 
chose navigation as a representative goal-directed task and defined 
an experimental task that required participants use AR cues to locate 
a pre-designated target parking space. 
4.1 
Participants 
Twenty-four drivers (17 male, 7 female) took part in the user study, 
with an age range of 18-40 years (mean = 27.35 yr.). Qualified 
participants were adults with perfect or perfect-corrected vision and at 
least two years of driving experience. 
4.2 
Experimental Design 
We conducted a two-factor within-subjects repeated measure 
experiment, where participants completed tasks using four types of 
AR graphics at three different distances from the navigation target. 
Figure 2 depicts the four AR graphics conditions inspired by the four 
interface design approaches in Figure 1. 
Screen-fixed (screen-fixed): displayed a static blue turn-arrow 
symbol indicating direction of target parking space and a dynamic 
counter of remaining distance to target space.  
Conformal (world-fixed): was a blue turn-arrow “painted” on the 
road and perceptually anchored adjacent to the target parking space. 
Compass (screen-animated): featured a flat circular area virtually 
attached to the participant’s car approximately eight meters in the 
forward-looking field. The circular area contained a blue navigation 
arrow that oriented itself dynamically in accordance with the changing 
position of the participant’s car relative to the target parking space. 
Pathway (world-animated): employed motion-based spatial ¬cues 
vis-à-vis an animated blue arrow that moved across the ground and 
pointed to the target parking space. 
     We examined driver performance and behavior at three distances 
(9m, 13.5m, and 18m) termed near, medium and far respectively, and 
defined as the distance between the onset of AR graphic and the target 
parking space location. We varied distance to better understand how 
different interface design approaches help drivers localize targets at 
different distances, and whether there is an interaction effect between 
design approach and distance to target. We used a 4x3 nested 
counterbalanced design to mitigate order effects across four AR 
graphics by three distance conditions. 
4.3 
Apparatus & Testbed 
During the user study, participants drove a 2009 Honda Odyssey test 
vehicle equipped with a volumetric head-up display provided by 
Honda Research Institute.  It is a projection-based volumetric display 
with a swept-volume technique [28] using fast switching image planes 
within a range of focal distance between 8m and infinity (0.125D ~ 
0D); affording flicker-free appearances of virtual objects in about 17° 
circular field of view.  
 
Fig. 1. We consider four classes of AR HUD interface design 
approaches ranging from traditional 2D HUD graphics (e.g., speed and 
symbology, top-left) to highly dynamic, animated conformal graphics 
(e.g., virtual car metaphor for navigation, bottom-right).  


1077-2626 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2868531, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
We authored testbed software in C++ and QT5 to render the AR 
graphics. The testbed software was designed to allow changes to the 
testbed parameters and AR interfaces in real-time, allowing iterative 
design and improvements to be made while conducting pilot testing 
directly in the outdoor experimental driving environment. GPS (uBlox 
EVK-M8N) was used to activate AR interfaces based on the test 
vehicle’s geolocation and used to track and record vehicle position via 
GPSD application. Additionally, an SMI ETG (80°*60° tracking 
range) recorded participants’ gaze behavior at 30Hz.  
     All experimental trials were conducted in an outdoor parking lot 
testbed.  The parking lot was a cordoned off area of approximately 100 
meters by 110 meters, or an area with enough width to allow 
participants to experience at least 10 seconds of straight driving at 
10mph. Participants’ tasks took place within a straight, preplanned 
event zone with known geolocations for target parking spaces. The 
event zone contained six cargo vans of identical color, parked in three 
of nine parking spaces on each of the left and right sides. The 
remaining six empty spaces on each side were numbered using 1x1 ft. 
upright signs placed at the opening of each space and facing 
participant’s approach (see Figure 2). 
4.4 
Procedure 
Trials were completed in ample daylight to afford safe vision by 
ensuring that light levels fell within useful daylight luminance 
(approximately 1000-2000 lux) [31]. Each participant first engaged in 
a practice drive with sample AR HUD graphics and tasks to become 
accustomed to the test vehicle dynamics and graphics. Participants 
drove around the parking lot in a pattern similar to that of actual 
testing. During this time, the researcher instructed the participant to 
drive as close as possible to 10 mph at all times unless they felt a 
situation warranted the correct action to brake, in which case they 
should freely brake in a manner as they would when normally driving. 
A researcher was present in the vehicle at all times, and constantly 
monitored participant's speed. If participants’ speed drifted beyond 
10±2 mph for more than 5 seconds, the researcher would verbally 
remind participants to hold a 10 mph speed. Participants were allowed 
to practice driving until they felt comfortable driving and viewing 
sample AR graphics. Once comfortable with the procedure, a 
researcher equipped participants with eye-tracking glasses and 
performed a calibration procedure to ensure accurate eye gaze 
tracking.  
For the experimental task, participants drove in a looping pattern 
around the parking lot. When entering the event zone, a navigation 
graphic would appear that participants used to localize the target 
parking space (which were randomly assigned per trial).  Once 
participants felt confident of their choice, they would verbalize the 
parking space number aloud. Participants were instructed to localize 
the spot as quickly as possible without losing accuracy.  
After each trial, participants completed a short five question survey 
in which they evaluated their perceived effectiveness of the AR 
graphics shown in the specific trial. The survey (taken from [32]) was 
designed to explore several key stages of the human cognition and was 
organized using a seven-point Likert scale ranging from strongly agree 
to strongly disagree. Participants rated their agreement with the 
following statements: (1) The visuals caught my attention quickly; (2) 
The visuals helped me detect objects in the real world relevant to the 
task at hand; (3) The visuals helped me predict the movement and the 
future action of real-world objects; (4) The visuals help me react 
appropriately to the urgency of the situation; and; (5) I felt confident 
using the system. 
     Following the conclusion of trials, participants were given the 
opportunity to provide detailed and contextual verbal feedback on any 
of the AR graphics they experienced. For brevity, we do not 
extensively report the qualitative data of verbal feedback in this paper, 
and instead, focus on reporting feedback via subjective ratings. 
4.5 
Dependent Measures 
To support an integrative view of the effect of AR interface designs 
on drivers, we collected measures for both task performance as well 
as driver eye behavior.  We evaluated task performance via:  
Verbal response time: difference in time (in seconds) between the 
onset of AR graphic and the moment participants provided their verbal 
response denoting which spot they believed the graphic was directing 
them towards.  
 
Fig. 2. Navigation user study AR graphics: (A) screen-fixed, (B) conformal, (C) compass, and (D) pathway. Since the compass and pathway 
interfaces changed appearance and/or location over time, figures 2c and 2d are approximate of what participants actually experienced (with 
yellow arrows denoting animation direction). 


1077-2626 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2868531, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
Verbal response accuracy: defined as the severity of judgement 
error, defined in the number of parking spaces from the correct target 
parking space. 
In assessing the effects of AR HUD designs on human 
performance, we believe it is critical to also examine driver eye 
behavior at both the “detection” phase of an event (i.e., when the 
driver must perceive an alert or direction from an AR interface 
element or target, respectively) and the “decision” phase of an event 
(i.e. when the driver must direct attention towards executing a 
response).  Thus, to explore the dynamics of visual attention, we 
established the following measures related to drivers’ eye behavior:   
Time to fixation on AR graphic (FG): the time elapsed between the 
onset of an AR graphic and fixation on the AR graphic. 
Time to fixate from AR graphic to task-related target (GT): time 
difference between participants’ fixation on AR graphic and target 
parking space. 
Time to fixation on task-related target (FT): time elapsed between 
onset of AR graphic and fixation on target parking space. FT can be 
represented as FG+GT. 
4.6 
Analysis & Results 
All collected measures were analyzed using either JMP or R code 
software packages. Inferential statistical comparisons were performed 
for each collected measure across all four AR graphic conditions and 
three distance conditions using two-way repeated measures Analysis 
of Variance (ANOVA) with post hoc contrast tests for planned 
comparisons among experimental conditions with Tukey’s adjustment 
for multiple comparisons. In figures graphing statistical results, 
significance between experimental conditions are reported by ‘***’ p 
< 0.001, ‘**’ p < 0.01, ‘*’ p < 0.05, and ‘•’ p < 0.1. Results shown in 
all figures are additionally annotated using either a square symbol to 
denote a screen-centric graphic approach or a circle to denote a world-
centric graphic approach. Similarly, results shown in all figures use 
either solid lines to denote fixed (or static) graphic approaches, or 
dashed lines to denote animated graphic approaches. Error bars 
indicate standard errors of the means. In cases of missing data, 
Satterthwaite approximations were used to compensate for lost 
degrees of freedom [33].  Unless otherwise stated, all data met 
normality assumptions initially or after log transformation. 
4.6.1 
Task Performance 
Repeated measures ANOVA tests found main effects of both interface 
(F(3,51) = 4.755, p =0.005) and distance to target parking space 
(F(2,32) = 8.793, p <0.001) on verbal response time. No interaction 
effects were found. Post-hoc contrast tests revealed that drivers’ 
verbal response times were longer in the compass condition as 
compared to conformal (t(49)=3.264, p =0.010) and pathway 
(t(50)=3.270, p=0.010). Examining interactions, we saw longer verbal 
response times for compass as compared to conformal (p =0.008) and 
pathway (p =0.008) at near distances and as compared to conformal 
graphics at medium distances (p =0.026), with no significant 
difference between AR graphic types at the far distance (Figure 3). 
We defined verbal response accuracy as the signed localization 
error as measured in number of parking spaces. Positive localization 
error indicates an overestimation of distance while negative 
localization denotes distance underestimation. ANOVA tests (Figure 
4) revealed significant main effects for both AR graphic (F(3, 51) = 
10.246, p<0.001) and distance (F(2, 35) = 41.861, p <0.001), as well 
as interaction effects (F(6, 99) = 5.340, p <0.001).  Post hoc tests show 
that screen-fixed graphics were overestimated more than conformal 
(t(52)=5.378, p <0.001) and pathway (t(53)=4.149, p<0.001) graphics.  
Also, compass graphics were consistently overestimated as compared 
to conformal graphics (t(50)=3.390, p =0.007). 95% confidence 
interval (CI) testing shows that conformal graphics were 
underestimated most severely at medium distance (-1.05 spaces [-
1.65, -0.46]) and far distances (-1.5 spaces [-2.09, -0.91]). All graphic 
types trended towards an underestimation at the far distance, a finding 
consistent with other AR-based depth judgement research (e.g., [16]).   
4.6.2 
Driver Eye Behavior 
We analyzed participants’ eye fixation patterns using SMI BeGaze 3.5 
software suite. We defined the AR graphic and the target parking 
space as significant areas of interest and coded fixations in these areas 
as such (all other fixations were labeled as “other”). After coding 
fixations in areas of interest, fixation data was further annotated with 
specific experimental condition and relevant dependent measure. 
Annotations were exported with timestamps and integrated with data 
logs from the testbed software using NumPy and Matplotlib.  
Gaze data was excluded for two participants due to poor eye-
tracking quality, and for another two participants after the integration 
process revealed the incorrectly logged data. In addition, a small 
subset of trials (approximately 12-24 instances, or once or twice per 
participant) were removed in cases where participants did not actually 
fixate on either the AR graphic or the target parking space.  
ANOVA tests found a significant main effect for time to fixation 
on graphic (FG) by AR graphic (F(3,6) = 3.218, p=0.024) but not for 
distance. Post-hoc analysis revealed that conformal graphics were 
fixated on more slowly than were screen-fixed graphics (t(53)=3.022, 
p=0.019).   Results are shown in Figure 5a. 
For fixation from graphic to target (GT), we found significant main 
effects of graphic type (F(3,98)=5.4956, p=0.001) and distance 
(F(2,61) = 5.139, p=0.007). Post-hoc analysis revealed that 
Fig. 3. Overall, participants needed more time to verbalize a target 
parking space using the compass as compared to conformal and 
pathway graphics, especially at near and medium distances. 
 
Fig. 4. Participants overestimated the position of the target parking 
space using screen-fixed graphics as compared to using compass 
and pathway graphics. Participants worst underestimations occurred 
at medium and far distances using conformal graphics. 


1077-2626 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2868531, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
participants were able to more quickly shift their gaze from conformal 
graphics to target parking spaces as compared to switching from the 
compass graphics (t(176)=3.904, p<.001) and pathway graphics 
(t(177)=2.805, p=.028) to target parking spaces (Figure 5b). 
Analysis of time to fixation on target (FT) revealed main effects 
for both AR graphic (F(3, 102)=5.580, p=0.001), and distance (F(2, 
64)=5.254, p=0.006). Post-hoc tests show that it took longer for 
participants to eventually fixate on parking space targets using 
compass graphics as compared to both screen-fixed (t(179)=2.759, p-
0.032) and conformal (t(177)=3.453, p=0.003) graphics. Analysis of 
interactions shows that at far distances, participants needed more time 
with the pathway graphic to fixate on the target as compared to using 
screen-fixed (p=0.013) and conformal (p=0.058) graphics (Figure 5c). 
4.6.3 
Subjective Feedback 
We analyzed participants’ subjective ratings for the awareness survey 
completed after each trial.  As the data was not normal, we used 
Friedman tests to examine ratings for significant differences but found 
no main effects for AR graphic. 
4.7 
Discussion 
Recall that an objective of this work was to better understand whether 
conformal interface approaches can improve driver performance (i.e., 
finding target parking space) and visual attention (as measured by 
graphics ability to capture and direct attention), as compared to 
traditional vehicle-fixed 2D interface designs. Further, we wanted to 
understand if adding animation to both vehicle-centric and world-
centric design approaches would result in additional performance 
gains. Based on our findings, world-fixed (conformal) and screen-
fixed (traditional HUD) design approaches were associated with 
similar response times needed to localize a target parking space and 
provide a verbal response to the perceived correct target space. 
However, when designating the target parking space, participants 
notably overestimated distances when using the screen-fixed designs 
as compared to conformal designs (especially at near and medium 
distances). At far distances, we saw no differences in accuracy 
between the two.  
The compass screen-animated design approach allowed drivers to 
make more accurate judgements than the world-fixed, conformal 
design at all distances. However, these gains in accuracy judgments 
came at the cost of time (by which it was associated with the slowest 
performance of all other design approaches). These findings support 
the idea that AR graphic designs that provide dynamic but relative 
directional cues (i.e., relative between drivers’ own-vehicle and target 
positions) may require drivers to “close the distance” to the target 
before the directional cue is effective.  That is, at a distance, drivers 
may not be able to discern which of a cluster of empty parking spaces 
a virtual compass is pointing to, but as drivers approach the group of 
parking spaces, the diagnosticity of the compass increases.  Therefore, 
this presentation style may not be effective in goal-directed tasks that 
require high granularity at distance (e.g., locating a parking space or 
townhouse address), but instead may be effective for goal-directed 
tasks with lower granularity such as street turning or highway ramp 
exiting that require much less precision for successful completion.  
Albeit under mixed distance conditions, both animated design 
approaches were generally associated with less overestimation and 
underestimation of distance as compared to world- or screen-fixed 
graphics. We expect that the extra feedback afforded through motion 
cues helped drivers make more accurate judgements. These results 
suggest that there are AR design opportunities beyond what is 
typically examined in the literature (i.e., screen-fixed and world-fixed 
conformal designs) that can leverage AR graphics’ motion to provide 
drivers with useful feedback on their position in space relative to a 
real-world target of importance.  
In examining the effect of AR design approaches on driver eye 
behavior, we propose that while ultimately the total time between 
graphic onset and target fixation is important (FT, total time needed to 
locate a target), researchers and practitioners can gain insight on 
candidate designs by teasing apart how much of the total time is 
needed to detect the AR graphic (e.g., using FG as a measure of 
attention capture) and how much time is needed to locate the target 
once the AR graphic is detected (e.g., using GT as a measure of how 
well an AR graphic can direct attention).  Indeed, examining Figure 5 
closely reveals that screen-fixed and world-fixed conformal cues have 
no significant difference in total time to locate a target, but what is 
very different is how these two graphics support the task. Specifically, 
the world-fixed cue is quick to capture attention but slow to guide, 
whereas the world-fixed conformal cue is slow to capture but quick to 
guide. 
Our results suggest that motion-based interface design approaches 
can be more effective than fixed-approaches at capturing attention, but 
in fact are slower to guide drivers’ attention to real-world targets. 
World-fixed conformal cues may not be effective at capturing 
attention since they naturally become less distinct at increasing 
distance due to perspective and apparent size depth cues. Moreover, 
conformal world-fixed navigation graphics that adopt a strict real-
world metaphor (e.g., painting a turn arrow on the road), can further 
suffer from low saliency at distance since its height in the visual field 
at distance can create a worst-case viewing perspective. Conversely, 
screen-fixed cues of adequate size and saliency will likely capture 
 
Fig. 5.  (A) Participants’ took longer to fixate on conformal cues as compared to screen-fixed. (B) Once seen (and fixated upon), participants 
were able to more quickly fixate on the target parking space using conformal AR cues (perhaps suggesting that conformal cues may guide 
attention toward a target more effectively than other graphic types). (C) When examining the total task time participants generally took longer 
locating a target parking space when using compass graphics, and compared to using screen-fixed and conformal graphics. Note that in (c), the 
lightly shaded portion of bar graphs represents FG, the fully saturated portions GT, and the overall height FT.  


1077-2626 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2868531, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
drivers’ attention independent of distance to their real-world referent 
due in part to the fact that the graphics are often oriented perpendicular 
to drivers’ line of sign and have a stable visual footprint independent 
of distance to target. 
The fact that the world-fixed conformal graphics were able to 
quickly guide attention to targets very likely occurred because the 
position of the world-fixed conformal graphic consistently matched 
the spatial location of the target for the duration of the task. In contrast, 
symbolic screen-fixed cues are arguably the most spatially 
disconnected from targets, requiring further cognitive processing to 
map the information conveyed into the forward-looking scene. For 
different reasons, the motion-based AR interfaces were also slower to 
guide attention to real-world targets than the conformal design. From 
observation, we noted that these design required time and/or distance 
to elapse before the cue could effectively guide drivers’ attention.  
Specifically, for the compass graphic, drivers had to spend time 
approaching (driving towards) the target, and in the case of the 
pathway, drivers had to wait for an animated world-fixed graphic to 
traverse towards an accurate but eventual target. 
Thus, our work suggests that while the spatial properties of world-
fixed conformal graphics may effectively direct attention to real-world 
targets, more work is needed to better understand how to design them 
such that they are easier to detect at distance (e.g., by increasing 
saliency and altering the viewing perspective).  Similarly, work is 
needed to understand how best to design motion-based AR cues for 
driving. In the interim, we suggest that care be taken to ensure that the 
motion characteristics that afford attention capture are not overly 
salient and accidentally demand too much of driver attention. And 
similarly, that the time and distance requirements for an animated 
graphic to be effective be taken into consideration to ensure that the 
driving task in which the AR is to support can adequately support 
those timelines. 
5 STUDY 2: STIMULUS-DRIVEN PEDESTRIAN COLLISION 
In the second user study, we were also interested in comparing 
animated AR interface design to traditional HUD and conformal 
designs but within the context of a stimulus-directed task. We defined 
a pedestrian collision event scenario (while driving through a parking 
lot) as a representative stimulus-driven task, whereby participants 
used AR cues to help identify a pedestrian stepping out from between 
two parked vehicles. 
5.1 
Participants 
The same twenty-four drivers (17 male, 7 female) from study 1 also 
took part in study 2, with an age range of 18-40 years (mean = 27.35 
yr.). Qualified participants were adults with perfect or perfect-
corrected vision and at least two years of driving experience. 
5.2 
Experimental Design 
We conducted a two-factor within-subjects repeated measure 
experiment, where participants completed tasks using four types of 
AR graphics (Figure 6) corresponding to the four interface design 
approaches in Figure 1. 
Screen-fixed (screen-fixed): displayed a static yellow pedestrian 
symbol indicating location of the real pedestrian (left or right) and a 
dynamic counter of remaining distance to the pedestrian. 
Conformal (world-fixed): presented a pedestrian crossing signpost 
perceptually anchored adjacent to the target pedestrian. 
Compass (screen-animated): featured a flat circular area virtually 
attached to the participant’s car approximately eight meters in the 
forward-looking field.  The circular area contained a yellow pedestrian 
sign that oriented itself dynamically in accordance with the changing 
position of the participant’s car relative to the target pedestrian. 
Pathway (world-animated): was realized as an animated virtual 
pedestrian symbol that simulated the actual pedestrian’s predicted 
path into the street. 
To better understand how AR interface designs may interact with the 
time- and distance-pressured demands of driving and ultimately driver 
performance and judgement, participants performed tasks at three 
different distances represent differing levels of urgency; high, 
medium, and low. Urgency levels were based on time to collision 
(TTC) measures established in the literature (e.g., [26, 28, 34]) and 
included: high urgency (~2s TTC), medium urgency (~3s TTC), and 
low urgency (~4s TTC). Resulting TTCs translated to approximately 
9m, 13.5m, and 18m from a target pedestrian given an instructed 
driving speed of 10 mph. 
 
Fig. 6. In study 2, AR graphics aimed to guide drivers’ attention to an actual pedestrian stepping out from behind a parked van. We tested four 
AR graphics types: A) screen-fixed, B) conformal, C) compass, and, D) pathway. Green arrow annotations were not visible and are shown here 
to merely denote animation direction. 


1077-2626 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2868531, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
5.3 
Experimental Design 
Study 2 used the same test vehicle, volumetric HUD, testbed software, 
GPS hardware/software, and eye-tracking equipment as Study 1. For 
Study 2, however, the testbed software also communicated with the 
test vehicle’s CANBUS to log velocity and ultimately derive 
deceleration profiles. The pedestrian study was performed in the same 
outdoor parking lot, with the same arrangement of six cargo vans. The 
numbered signs used in the navigation study were removed, and black 
cloth was hung at the rear of each cargo van to prevent participants 
from seeing the pedestrian’s feet before stepping out (see Figure 6). 
5.4 
Procedure 
Trials were completed under monitored daylight conditions between 
approximately 1000-2000 lux [31]. As in Study 1, participants 
experienced a practice drive with sample AR HUD graphics, and were 
instructed to drive 10 mph (with similar contingencies in place when 
participants would deviate from 10 mph). Once participants were 
comfortable with the procedure, a researcher equipped participants 
with eye-tracking glasses and performed a calibration procedure. 
For the experimental task, participants were instructed to drive as 
they normally would, and respond to any “sudden events” using aids 
provided via HUD graphics. Periodically a participant could 
experience a pedestrian event, in which a pedestrian actor would walk 
out from behind a parked cargo can and face the road in a manner that 
indicated they were about to cross into the path of the vehicle (the 
pedestrian actor did not actually walk into the intersecting path of the 
participant’s test vehicle).  As pedestrian actors stepped out from 
behind a parked van, the HUD displayed a pedestrian alert AR graphic 
and the participant would need to brake in order to avoid a theoretical 
collision. To simulate a believable scenario, the pedestrian actor’s 
behavior was timed carefully to match the graphic appearance using 
pre-defined locations of pedestrians and a trigger point for pedestrians 
to begin movement using a “Wizard of Oz” technique similar to those 
developed in past work [28, 35]. Both the researcher in the car and the 
two researchers acting as pedestrians were in communication with 
each other at all times via standard localized short-range radios. When 
the test vehicle passed the pre-defined trigger point, a GPS data feed 
would trigger the onset of the visual warning, while the pedestrian 
actor was signaled to step out via radio (with an approximate 0.5 
second lead time for actor signals to compensate for actor reaction 
time based on practice and pilot testing).  We used trigger mapping 
with a 0.5m tolerance to ensure that triggers would still occur given a 
GPS sampling rate of approximately 20Hz.  
     After each trial, participants completed a short five question survey 
on perceived effectiveness of the AR graphics, followed by the 
opportunity to provide qualitative feedback on the AR graphics. 
5.5 
Dependent Measures 
For the pedestrian study, we focused on braking performance as a 
means to evaluate participant’s task performance. Specifically, 
braking performance was evaluated using the following metrics:  
Time to stop: the difference in time (measured in seconds) between 
the instant the pedestrian actor began stepping out into the road and an 
AR graphic simultaneously appeared, and the moment that 
participants’ test vehicle reached zero velocity and came to rest. 
Vehicle stop gap: calculated by measuring the remaining longitudinal 
distance (in meters) between the location of participants’ stopped test 
vehicle and pedestrian actor.  
Peak deceleration during braking: derived from the acceleration 
profile logged during braking (in meters/second2), and is useful to 
account for the risk of rear-end collision (e.g., by a closely following 
“tailgating” vehicle) that could theoretically occur when drivers 
urgently brake. 
As with the navigation study, we also evaluated driver gaze 
behavior using measures of:  
Time to fixation on AR graphic (FG): the time elapsed between the 
onset of an AR graphic and fixation on the AR graphic. 
Time to fixate from AR graphic to task-related target (GT): time 
difference between participants’ fixation on AR graphic and 
pedestrian actor. 
Time to fixation on task-related target (FT): time elapsed between 
onset of AR graphic and fixation on the pedestrian actor. 
5.6 
Analysis and Results 
5.6.1 
Task Performance 
For braking response time, ANOVA testing found a significant main 
effect for urgency (F(2,34)=28.818, p<0.001) but no main effect for 
AR graphic type or interaction effects were found. Post hos analysis 
revealed that time to stop was significantly faster for pathway 
graphics (p=0.013) as compared to screen-fixed AR graphics, but 
only at medium urgency. Differences in stop time are shown below 
in Figure 7. 
     ANOVA tests on vehicle stop gap found a significant main effect 
for both graphic type (F(3,151)=334.06, p<0.001) and distance 
(F(2,34)=58.020, p<0.001), but no interaction effects. Generally, 
stop gaps decreased with urgency and were similar across all graphic 
types except for the compass, which showed significantly shorter 
stop gaps as compared to other AR graphics (all pairwise 
comparisons p<0.001). Of particular note is that in high urgency 
 
Fig. 7. Time to stop during pedestrian scenarios remained similar for 
most AR graphics (except for screen-fixed in a medium urgent 
situation), but decreased in tandem with increasing urgency.  
Fig. 8. Final vehicle stop gap by AR graphic and urgency. Participants 
using the compass displayed much smaller stop gaps than when using 
any other AR graphic. In the high urgent conditions participants 
actually stopped on average beyond the pedestrian, meaning that a 
collision could have occurred. 


1077-2626 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2868531, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
situation, the compass graphic was associated with negative stop 
gaps, which implies that pedestrian collision could have occurred 
(but of course did not in this controlled experiment). Results for 
vehicle stop gap are shown in Figure 8. 
     Estimates for peak deceleration during breaking were derived by 
using velocity and time differentials between data points sampled 
from the test vehicle’s CANBUS. Due to some levels of noise in the 
initial data set, the deceleration feed from CANBUS velocity logs 
was first filtered using a moving average filter for five samples 
(given a GPS sampling rate of 20 Hz) before obtaining peak 
deceleration values. As to be expected, a significant main effect was 
found for urgency of situation (F(2, 34)=31.631, p<0.001), with 
participants expectedly breaking harder in more urgent situations. No 
main effects were found for AR interfaces. 
5.6.2 
Driver Eye Behavior 
We analyzed participants’ eye fixation patterns using a similar method 
to that described in the navigation study. We defined the AR graphic 
and the pedestrian actor as significant areas of interest, and coded 
fixations in these areas. Fixation data were further annotated to specify 
the experimental condition and dependent measure associated with 
each fixation event.  We calculated FG, GT, and FT and performed an 
ANOVA. However, no significant differences were found across any 
of these measures for AR graphic type or urgency. 
5.6.3 
Subjective Feedback 
We analyzed participants’ subjective awareness survey responses 
collected after each trial.  As the data did not follow a normal 
distribution even after logarithmic transformation, we conducted non-
parametric Friedman tests of differences among repeated measures 
and found a main effect for AR graphic style for capturing attention 
quickly (X 2 (3, N = 239) = 12.304, p <.01), reacting to situation 
urgency (X 2 (3, N = 239) = 11.801, p <.01), and predicting future 
motion of objects (X 2 (3, N = 239) = 8.012, p <.05). Post-hoc analysis 
conducted for main effects using Wilcoxon signed-rank tests revealed 
that participants gave lower ratings for conformal graphics than screen 
fixed (p=0.034) and compass graphics (p=0.043) for capturing 
attention quickly, lower ratings for conformal graphics than screen 
fixed (p=0.015) and pathway graphics (p=0.038) for reacting to 
situation urgency, and higher ratings for pathway graphics than 
conformal (p=0.002), screen fixed (p=0.031), and compass graphics 
(p=0.030) for predicting future motion of objects. Results are shown 
in Figure 9. 
5.7 
Discussion 
For stimulus-driven pedestrian tasks, we see that some animated 
interface designs, such as the compass, may be significantly less 
effective at facilitating safe vehicle stop gaps as compared to other AR 
interface design approaches. As mentioned in the navigation study, the 
nature of the compass graphic requires drivers to cover distance (and 
consume time) to activate and provide salient spatial cueing, which is 
in direct conflict with the required action the AR graphic is meant to 
provoke (i.e., effective braking and stopping).  At close range and 
relatively high urgency situations, drivers may actually have been 
encouraged to continue moving in order to “complete” the function of 
the animated compass. Indeed, from empirical observations, we 
believe this phenomenon explains why participants using the compass 
in urgent situations exhibited dangerous behavior resulting in negative 
stop gaps (Figure 8). Such finding suggests that when designing 
animated AR graphics to communicate a real-world hazard to drivers, 
it is recommended that such graphics employ animations that are 
independent of the vehicle’s motion itself. The world-animated 
pathway pedestrian graphic is such an example, which exhibited 
animation independent of vehicle speed and/or distance travelled still 
providing important spatial cues about the hazard and even offering a 
prediction of the hazard’s future behavior.  
Compass measures for stop gap notwithstanding, for the most part, 
time to stop, stop gap, and peak deceleration remained similar across 
all interface design approaches. Additionally, visual attention 
measures were not necessarily improved by any particular AR 
interface design.  Rather, in cases where urgent action is required, 
drivers may simply leverage the appearance of a graphic to facilitate 
improved reaction to threats.  Moreover, in our study, the pedestrian 
actor was a single pedestrian stepping out into an otherwise lifeless 
scene.  The motion and uniqueness of the single pedestrian actor could 
have caused a pop-out effect, resulting in immediate attentional 
capture and thus requiring little need for participants to use the AR 
graphic other than for the basic directional alert. Additionally, since 
the world-fixed conformal, as well as the world-animated pedestrian 
graphics, were presented perpendicular to drivers’ forward view, it 
could be argued that all four AR interface designs served as equally 
visible and salient alerts. These observations could explain why no 
significant differences were found for AR graphic type or urgency 
across FG, GT and FT. Thus, designers could consider a simple but 
salient world- or screen-fixed directional cue to be sufficient for single 
pedestrian hazard use cases.  But it should be cautioned that this 
recommendation is difficult to generalize beyond the lone pedestrian 
use case since many driving scenes include a number of moving and 
potentially hazardous pedestrians.  
 
Fig. 9. Subjective feedback ratings for the five question awareness survey from the pedestrian study. Conformal graphics are generally rated 
more poorly than others, with significance indicated by colored asterisks. 


1077-2626 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2868531, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
Lastly, when coding the eye-tracking video, we noticed that world-
fixed conformal AR graphics used to cue highly urgent (near) 
pedestrians would often quickly appear and then move out of the left 
or right edge of the AR HUD field of view.  That is, since nearby 
pedestrians entering the roadway from the side are by definition 
positioned to the left and right of the vehicle, it can be difficult if not 
impossible to conformally annotate these pedestrians given HUD’s 
currently limited horizontal FOV.  Thus, in cases where real-world 
referents are located to the side of the driver, or even on a sidewalk 
that will eventually track to the side of a driver, care should be taken 
when designing with world-fixed conformal graphics since they are 
unable to guide drivers’ attention if they are not rendered within the 
HUD FOV. This finding is supported by the relatively low subjective 
ratings that participants gave conformal AR graphics on their ability 
to capture attention, facilitate reaction, and provide prediction on 
future behavior of the target threat. 
6 COMPARATIVE INSIGHTS ACROSS THE TWO USER 
STUDIES 
By design, the two user studies presented herein systematically 
investigated similar, yet different AR interface designs across a 
navigation and pedestrian usage scenarios.  Through analysis and 
discussion, we can extract some high-level insights that are best 
presented within the context of both user studies. 
 First, when considering the arguable merits of using AR to guide 
drivers’ visual attention, designers should consider the usage context; 
specifically, the type of real- and virtual visual stimuli available.  For 
example, in a goal-directed task such as navigation, an AR graphic 
may serve as the primary, salient visual cue required to accomplish 
the target-localization task.  Conversely, in a stimulus-driven 
environment, the AR cue is by definition competing with a real-world 
visual stimulus. In these cases, the AR cue is not required to complete 
the task, and in worse cases may compete for attentional resources that 
otherwise could be allocated to critical real-world visual stimuli. 
The effectiveness of conformal graphics in driving is likely 
strongly tied to the relationship between the shape and orientation of 
the cue as well as the distance to the cue.  For example, AR graphics 
that are planar in nature will be more salient if presented perpendicular 
to drivers’ line of sight, even though such placements will often not 
make practical sense (e.g., nearby upright conformal AR graphics may 
occlude other vehicles in the forward roadway). Conversely, planar 
conformal AR graphics that lay on the horizon at a distance should be 
avoided since they are difficult to perceive. It is possible that the 
effectiveness of some conformal cues could be improved by instead 
placing nearby conformal cues near-flat on the ground (e.g., rendering 
a virtual pedestrian walkway on the forward roadway), and far cues 
upright for easy visibility at distance (e.g., highlighting landmarks, or 
placing turn arrows on the side of distant buildings instead of the road.   
      Lastly, the left/right orientation of symbology as well as the 
direction-of-animation, should be carefully considered when 
supporting both goal-directed and stimulus-driven tasks.  To direct 
attention in navigation scenarios, clearly, all symbols (e.g., arrows) 
should point from the driver to the target.  However, when designing 
screen- and world-fixed pedestrian cues (as shown in Figure 6a and 
6b), should the symbol face away from the actual pedestrian (to 
convey direction of actual pedestrian travel), or towards the actual 
pedestrian in hopes of better guiding drivers’ visual attention? 
Similarly, when animating AR cues to support a goal-directed 
navigation task, it is reasonable to assume an animation path that, for 
example, mimics the planned driver route (from the driver to the 
target). However, motion cues for stimulus-driven tasks may be best 
rendered in the opposite fashion, since movement from the actual 
pedestrian to the projected collision point can convey future 
movements, despite the animation’s start position being rendered near 
the HUD’s periphery (and possibly outside the HUD FOV). 
7 LIMITATIONS 
As with many research endeavors, challenging outdoor AR studies 
that involve human-subjects driving real vehicles are subject to 
limitations. The use of a GPS system operating at a sampling rate of 
20Hz was sufficient to produce results with reasonable granularity, but 
also functioned as a source of uncertainty and noise for measures 
relating to driving performance. It is possible that a lack of differences 
found in peak braking deceleration could have been aggravated by the 
relatively large amount of noise introduced when deriving the measure 
from raw data logs. Additionally, the pedestrian study used GPS and 
Wizard of Oz to synchronize the onset of AR graphics and pedestrian 
actors, which could introduce small errors despite practice and pilot 
testing. A similar study using machine vision to detect the test vehicle 
position, cue pedestrian actors, and render AR graphics could likely 
produce more pronounced differences in the stimulus-driven study.  
     Bona fide driver reactions and behavior in real threat scenarios is 
difficult to induce and authentically re-create in experimental testbeds, 
whether it be simulated or real-world. The mere fact that drivers were 
partaking in an experiment likely influenced their perceived level of 
threat, risk, and expectancy of upcoming experimental events. Limits 
in available time and resources meant road events were required to 
occur more frequently than would naturally occur on-road. A future 
study conducted in a larger test area with more naturalistic conditions 
(for example, in a city instead of a parking lot) would likely better 
approximate the true conditions in which AR graphics would be used. 
8 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this work, we explore the impact of interface design approach on 
driver performance and visual behavior when engaging in top-down 
and bottom-up processing. We demonstrate that vehicle- and world-
animated approaches using directional and motion-based cues can 
support accurate judgments with less spatial error of localization than 
either traditional screen-fixed or world-fixed conformal cues anchored 
in place. Though compass AR graphics consistently produce the 
highest judgement accuracy, this design approach does not always 
produce fast response times and are likely not appropriate for goal-
directed tasks that require fine-grained or rigorous localization. AR 
graphics that employ animation based on a vehicle’s continued 
movement should be avoided in stimulus-driven scenarios that require 
a driver to cease movement quickly in order to avoid consequences.  
      Designers can leverage unique gains from both directional and 
spatially-based conformal cues but should consider carefully in which 
situations their inclusion is appropriate or safe. In this work, we 
explore only a small subset of AR design approaches and exclude 
numerous variations such as temporal dependencies (i.e. task 
completion-based cue duration vs. predetermined presentation 
duration) and saliency-related animations (such as graphics blinking 
or fade-in and -out).  Further work is needed to fully conceptualize 
and understand this application area for AR, particularly to examine 
the limits of what is achievable within the still relatively small AR 
design canvas afforded by current HUD technology. Still, this work 
demonstrates that the design space of automotive AR applications 
need not be limited to traditional 2D screen-fixed or world-fixed 
graphics alone.  The future effectiveness of AR driving interfaces will 
depend on the extent to which designers can creatively exploit the 
strengths of augmented reality while managing the perceptual and 
attentional ramifications associated with human use of such interfaces. 
9 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors wish to thank Alex Miranda for his consultation on the 
Honda Odyssey vehicle CANBUS operation as well as Joey Wu, 
Jordon Horengic, Sarah Lee, and Cole Benedict for assisting in coding 
eye-tracking data, and Matt Chau, Deborah Asabere, Youngjae Lee, 
and Joey Lee for their work as pedestrian actors during data collection. 
We further appreciate Ethan Larsen’s excellent photography work 
capturing realistic views of driver perspective. 


1077-2626 (c) 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2868531, IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
REFERENCES 
[1] 
I. M. Relations. "Automotive Head-Up Display Market Goes into 
High Gear," 2018; http://news.ihsmarkit.com/press-release/design-
supply-chain/automotive-head-display-market-goes-high-gear. 
[2] 
H. Guo, F. Zhao, W. Wang et al., “Analyzing Drivers' Attitude 
towards HuD system using a stated Preference survey,” Advances 
in Mechanical Engineering, vol. 6, pp. 380647, 2014. 
[3] 
M. Ablassmeier, G. Mcglaun, and G. Rigoll, "Evaluating the 
potential of head-up displays for a multimodal interaction concept 
in the automotive environment." 
[4] 
B. Holt. "10 Reasons the 2018 Toyota Prius is the AutoWeb 
Buyer’s 
Choice 
Best 
Alternative 
Fuel 
Vehicle," 
2018; 
https://www.autobytel.com/auto-news/awards/10-reasons-the-
2018-toyota-prius-is-the-autoweb-buyer-s-choice-best-alternative-
fuel-132364/. 
[5] 
J. Meiners. "BMW Vision ConnectedDrive Concept," 2018; 
https://www.caranddriver.com/news/bmw-vision-connecteddrive-
concept-photos-and-info. 
[6] 
R. Glon. "The best head-up displays (HUDs) for your car," 2018; 
https://www.digitaltrends.com/cars/best-head-up-displays/. 
[7] 
M. Tonnis, C. Lange, and G. Klinker, "Visual longitudinal and 
lateral driving assistance in the head-up display of cars." pp. 91-94. 
[8] 
Z. Medenica, A. L. Kun, T. Paek et al., "Augmented reality vs. 
street views: a driving simulator study comparing two emerging 
navigation aids." pp. 265-274. 
[9] 
W. Narzt, G. Pomberger, A. Ferscha et al., “Augmented reality 
navigation systems,” Universal Access in the Information Society, 
vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 177-187, 2006. 
[10] 
A. May, T. Ross, and Z. Osman, “The design of next generation in-
vehicle navigation systems for the older driver,” Interacting with 
computers, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 643-659, 2005. 
[11] 
M. Blanco, “Effects of in-vehicle information systems (IVIS) tasks 
on the information processing demands of a commercial vehicle 
operations (CVO) driver,” Virginia Tech, 1999. 
[12] 
Y.-C. Liu, and M.-H. Wen, “Comparison of head-up display (HUD) 
vs. head-down display (HDD): driving performance of commercial 
vehicle operators in Taiwan,” International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 679-697, 2004. 
[13] 
K. Bark, C. Tran, K. Fujimura et al., "Personal Navi: Benefits of an 
augmented reality navigational aid using a see-thru 3D volumetric 
HUD." pp. 1-8. 
[14] 
S. Kim, and A. K. Dey, "Simulated augmented reality windshield 
display as a cognitive mapping aid for elder driver navigation." pp. 
133-142. 
[15] 
P. Froehlich, R. Schatz, P. Leitner et al., "Evaluating realistic 
visualizations for safety-related in-car information systems." pp. 
3847-3852. 
[16] 
R. Eyraud, E. Zibetti, and T. Baccino, “Allocation of visual 
attention while driving with simulated augmented reality,” 
Transportation research part F: traffic psychology and behaviour, 
vol. 32, pp. 46-55, 2015. 
[17] 
M. R. Savino, “Standardized names and definitions for driving 
performance measures,” Tufts University, 2009. 
[18] 
J. L. Gabbard, J. E. Swan, and D. Hix, “The effects of text drawing 
styles, background textures, and natural lighting on text legibility in 
outdoor augmented reality,” Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual 
Environments, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 16-32, 2006. 
[19] 
J. L. Gabbard, J. E. Swan, D. Hix et al., "An empirical user-based 
study of text drawing styles and outdoor background textures for 
augmented reality." pp. 11-18. 
[20] 
J. L. Gabbard, G. M. Fitch, and H. Kim, “Behind the Glass: Driver 
challenges and opportunities for AR automotive applications,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 102, no. 2, pp. 124-136, 2014. 
[21] 
M. Tonnis, V. Broy, and G. Klinker, "A survey of challenges related 
to the design of 3d user interfaces for car drivers." pp. 127-134. 
[22] 
Y. Inuzuka, Y. Osumi, and H. Shinkai, "Visibility of head up 
display (HUD) for automobiles." pp. 1574-1578. 
[23] 
D. R. Tufano, “Automotive HUDs: The overlooked safety issues,” 
Human factors, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 303-311, 1997. 
[24] 
K. W. Gish, and L. Staplin, “Human factors aspects of using head 
up displays in automobiles: A review of the literature,” 1995. 
[25] 
D. Gupta, “An empirical study of the effects of context-switch, 
object distance, and focus depth on human performance in 
augmented reality,” Virginia Tech, 2004. 
[26] 
C. Merenda, H. Kim, J. L. Gabbard et al., "Did You See Me?: 
Assessing Perceptual vs. Real Driving Gains Across Multi-Modal 
Pedestrian Alert Systems." pp. 40-49. 
[27] 
L. Pomarjanschi, M. Dorr, and E. Barth, “Gaze guidance reduces 
the number of collisions with pedestrians in a driving simulator,” 
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS), vol. 1, 
no. 2, pp. 8, 2012. 
[28] 
H. Kim, A. Miranda Anon, T. Misu et al., "Look at Me: Augmented 
Reality Pedestrian Warning System Using an In-Vehicle 
Volumetric Head Up Display." pp. 294-298. 
[29] 
H. Kim, J. L. Gabbard, A. M. Anon et al., “Driver Behavior and 
Performance with Augmented Reality Pedestrian Collision 
Warning: An Outdoor User Study,” IEEE transactions on 
visualization and computer graphics, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 1515-1524, 
2018. 
[30] 
A. Paran, “Bottom-up and top-down processing,” English Teaching 
Professional, vol. 3, no. 11, 1997. 
[31] 
P. R. Boyce, “Illumination,” Handbook of Human Factors and 
Ergonomics, Fourth Edition, pp. 673-698, 1997. 
[32] 
H. Kim, J. D. Isleib, and J. L. Gabbard, "Virtual Shadow: Making 
Cross Traffic Dynamics Visible through Augmented Reality Head 
Up Display." pp. 2093-2097. 
[33] 
F. E. Satterthwaite, “An approximate distribution of estimates of 
variance components,” Biometrics bulletin, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 110-
114, 1946. 
[34] 
J. H. Lim, O. Tsimhoni, and Y. Liu, “Investigation of driver 
performance with night vision and pedestrian detection systems—
Part I: Empirical study on visual clutter and glance behavior,” IEEE 
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 11, no. 3, 
pp. 670-677, 2010. 
[35] 
J. J. Anaya, P. Merdrignac, O. Shagdar et al., "Vehicle to pedestrian 
communications for protection of vulnerable road users." pp. 1037-
1042. 
 


