Evaluating Automotive Augmented Reality Head-up Display Effects on 
Driver Performance and Distraction
 
Nayara de Oliveira Faria*
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
 
ABSTRACT
As the automotive industry progresses towards the car of the future, 
we have seen increasing interest using augmented reality (AR) 
head-up displays (HUD) in driving. AR HUDs provide a 
fundamentally new driving experience in which drivers still have 
to respond to both the road and the information provided by the 
system, creating the perfect atmosphere for potentially unsafe and 
distracting interfaces. As we start fielding and designing for new 
AR HUDs displays, the complexities of interface design and its 
impacts on driver performance must be further understood before 
AR HUDs can be broadly and safely incorporated into vehicles. 
Nevertheless, existing methods for assessing the usefulness of 
computer-based user interfaces may not be sufficiently rich to 
measure the overall impact of AR HUD interfaces on human 
performance. Therefore, in my Ph.D. research, I focus on 
developing and testing methods to evaluate AR HUDs' effects on 
driver distraction and performance. My primary goal is to assess 
glance allocation and visual capabilities of drivers with AR HUDs 
and apply this knowledge to inform new methods of AR HUD 
assessment that account for inattentional blindness and cognitive 
tunneling.  
Keywords: Augmented Reality, Head-Up Display, Driving. 
Index Terms: H.5.1: Multimedia Information Systems — 
Artificial, Augmented, and Virtual Realities; H.5.2: User Interfaces 
— Ergonomics, Evaluation / Methodology, Screen Design, Style 
Guides 
1
INTRODUCTION
The role of Augmented Reality (AR) in the automotive industry has 
increased considerably over the last decades. Vehicles with AR 
graphics delivered via head-up displays (HUDs) are nearing 
mainstream commercial feasibility, and very shortly, we expect 
increasingly large AR HUD field of views at varying depths. This 
technological advance will allow information to be placed in 
several locations, from windshield-fixed positions to conformal 
graphics which appear to be linked to real-world objects. The 
cognitive and perceptual separation between AR graphics and real-
world visual stimuli will, therefore, be more difficult to quantify.
Quantifying the visual and cognitive requirements of AR HUDs 
is crucial for assessing whether the technology is hazardous and 
distracting for use in transportation applications. Nevertheless, 
current methods for evaluating user interfaces in this space do not 
account for the fact that AR HUDs are not merely in the 
environment, but are instead an integrated part of the environment. 
Specifically, AR HUD interfaces exist within the line of sight 
needed to perform the primary visual driving task; moreover, these 
AR interfaces may be present independent of whether or not drivers 
should be attending them.  
In this context, this work herein aims to address the following 
question: When AR HUD user interfaces are visually integrated 
into the primary task space, what are the best methods to assess AR 
HUD’s effect on driver performance? To examine the uniqueness 
of attention management in visually integrated environments, I will 
explore two crucial psychological perceptual phenomena: cognitive 
tunneling and inattentional blindness. Such definitions will be 
clarified in the next section.  
2
BACKGROUND
Without attention, people fail to perceive important visual features 
of the environment they are looking at [1]. This phenomenon is 
known as inattentional blindness [2], that in simple words, means 
looking without seeing. Because the primary task of driving poses 
high cognitive demand on the driver, the visual information 
presented in the user’s field of view by AR HUDs could be 
overlooked if the person’s attention is focused on another activity
or the environment. It is, therefore, essential to examine and 
consider how AR HUDs affect these perception breakdowns in 
dangerous driving situations in which drivers must respond quickly 
to centralized road hazards, such as other vehicles and pedestrians.
In this study, I will use the Central Detection Task (CDT) to 
examine inattentional blindness. CDT is a well-established method 
for examining inattentional blindness of important real-world 
events while performing secondary AR HUD tasks. In 
transportation research, CDT has been used to investigate 
inattentional blindness in terms of drivers’ ability to perceive a shift 
in traffic light color [3, 4] and a lead car’s brake [5].
Cognitive tunneling is a phenomenon in which people 
involuntary fix mental resources on one aspect of the interface at 
the expense of other sources of information [6]. This effect is often 
studied using the peripheral detection task (PDT) method in which 
drivers’ visual distraction in driving can be assessed by measuring 
the cognitive selectivity of attention [7]. In this study, the PDT task 
will  place targets directly on the road scene at different levels of 
eccentricity, as used by Huisingh et al. [8].  
3
PROPOSED WORK
The proposed work will be carried out in four major phases, which 
will be described below. To accomplish the goals outlined in this 
paper, I will be working at the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University with my dissertation advisor, Dr. Joseph L. 
Gabbard. I will collect empiric human-factor data for each step 
through a series of carefully designed user studies, using a fixed-
based, medium-fidelity driving simulator at the Cogent Lab. This 
simulator is composed of the front half of a 2014 Mini Cooper cab 
fitted with a curved projection with 94 degrees of view displaying 
a simulated road scene and contains both side and rear-view mirrors 
that allow participants to view their surrounding environment. The 
simulator also contains a 7" Lilliput USB monitor mounted directly 
behind the steering wheel to convey vehicle speed information. 
* nfaria@vt.edu 
553
2020 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW)
978-1-7281-6532-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/VRW50115.2020.00128
Authorized licensed use limited to: Western Sydney University. Downloaded on July 25,2020 at 18:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


Additionally, the simulator is equipped with a Pioneer Cyber Navi 
HUD with conformal AR graphics capabilities. The area displayed 
on HUD is 780x260 pixels, FOV is 15 degrees and the virtual image 
position is approximately 3m away from the eyepoint. The driving 
simulator software is integrated with customized software, 
developed using X3D and Python, so that the AR HUD can provide 
real-time 3D AR graphics perceptually overlaid into the dynamic 
CG-generated driving scene. That is, unlike other studies that 
render AR directly into a simulated environment (e.g. using virtual 
reality), our testbed renders AR graphics onto an aftermarket HUD, 
calibrated to a projected road scene to produce a more ecologically 
valid driver experience 
Phase 1:  Establishing thresholds for AR HUD glance duration. We 
conducted three human-factors user studies in which we have 
employed generic psychophysical and ecologically-valid AR HUD 
tasks to systematically examine the effects of extended single 
glance durations on driver performance. In this phase, we aimed to 
answer two main questions (1) How long can a driver safely glance 
at an AR HUD? (2) How long will a driver safely glance at an AR 
HUD?  
For question 1, recent work by Gabbard  [9] suggested that AR 
HUDs can afford more prolonged glances with no decrement in 
driver performance; thus, the current upper threshold standard of 
20 seconds [10] may not be applicable for AR HUDs.  Therefore, 
we used a random letter reveal technique to examine longer 
sustained AR HUD glance durations (e.g., 2, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 40, 
and 50 seconds) on driver performance and distraction. For 
question 2, we developed two ecologically-valid secondary tasks 
(e.g., incoming text messaging and picking from a list) to 
investigate how long drivers choose to glance at an AR HUD.  The 
findings of this process are still at the analysis level. 
Phase 2:  Developing Central Detection Task (CDT) methods and 
metrics to assess the effects of AR HUD visual demand on 
inattentional blindness. Phase 3:  Developing Peripheral Detection 
Task (PDT) methods and metrics to evaluate the effects of AR 
HUD visual demand on cognitive tunneling.  
For these two stages, I need to understand better how to create an 
experimental task that engages participants in the driving task while 
attending to HUD graphics. I will welcome input and insight into 
the AR tasks to be used, the theoretical nature of both CDT and 
PDT tasks, and the complexities of the simulation system to be 
designed. 
Phase 4:  Validating combined CDT and PDT methods - We plan 
to conduct a final human factors user study to test our CDT and 
PDT methods on an actual roadway (Virginia Smart Road). Here 
an open question to be discussed: How can real-world variables be 
mitigated when using AR is used in open environments to test AR 
interfaces built-in a close environement driving simulator? 
4
CONCLUSION
We still have much to learn on how attending to integrated AR 
HUD graphics affects driving performance, how well we can 
leverage AR graphics to guide visual attention to important real-
world hazards, and to what extent the visual onset of HUD graphics 
draws attention away from the driving scene. Because this work is 
still in its infancy, I would like to highlight some of the questions 
that could be discussed during the consortium that will better shape 
my work:a) Is inattentional blindness and cognitive tunneling the 
best measures of distraction when using AR HUDs? b) Are there 
any other AR perceptual considerations that I should include in the 
context of my work? (c) What are the best methods for assessing 
the ecological validity of the AR tasks used in this research? 
Finally, I am also seeking feedback on the design of the user 
studies, and on the metrics that will be used to evaluate these new 
methods. 
5
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science 
Foundation under Grant No. 1816721 
REFERENCES
[1]  
D. J. Simons And C. F. Chabris, "Gorillas In Our Midst: 
Sustained Inattentional Blindness For Dynamic Events," 
Perception, Vol. 28, Pp. 1059 - 1074, 1999.  
[2]  
U. Neisser, "The Control Of Information Pickup In Selective 
Looking.," In Perception And Its Development: A Tribute To 
Eleanor Gibson, Hillsdale, Nj, Erlbaum, 1979, Pp. 201-219. 
[3]  
J. Caird, S. Chisholm And J. Lockhart, "Do In-Vehicle 
Advanced Signs Enhance Older And Younger Drivers' 
Intersection Performance? Driving Simulaton And Eye Moveent 
Results," International Journal Of Human-Computer Studies, Vol. 
66, Pp. 132-144, 2008.  
[4]  
C. Olaverri-Montreal, P. Gomes, M. Silveria And M. Ferreira, 
"In-Vehicle Virtual Traffic Lights: A Graphical User Interface," 
In Information Systems And Technologies (Cisti), 2012.  
[5]  
J. Wolffsohn, N. Mcbrien, G. Edgar And T. Stout, "The 
Influence Of Cognition And Age On Accomodation, Detection 
Rate And Response Times When Using A Car Head-Up Display 
(Hud)," Ophthalmic And Physiological Optics, Vol. 18, Pp. 243-
253, 1998.  
[6]  
P. Ververs And C. Wickens, "Designing Head-Up Displays 
(Huds) To Support Flight Path Guidance While Minimizing 
Effects Of Cognitive Tunneling," In Iea 2000/Hfes 2000 
Congress, 2000.  
[7]  
M. Martens And W. Van Winsum, "Measuring Distraction: The 
Peripheral Detection Task," Tno Human Factors, 2000.  
[8]  
C. Huisingh, G. Mcgwin, J. Wood And C. Owsley, "The 
Driving Visual Field And A History Of Motor Vehicle Collision 
Involvement In Older Drivers: A Population-Based Examination 
Driving Visual Field And Motor Vehicle Collision," Investigative 
Ophthalmology And Visual Science, Pp. 23-26, 2003.  
[9]  
M. Smith, J. Gabbard, G. Burnett And N. Doutcheva, "The 
Effects Of Augmented Reality Head-Up Displays On Drivers' Eye 
Scan Patterns, Performance And, Perceptions," International 
Journal Of Mobile Human Computer Interaction (Ijmhci), Vol. 9, 
Pp. 1-17, 2017.  
[10] 
U.S. Department Of Transportation’s National Highw, 
"USDOT Releases 2016 Fatal Traffic Crash Data," 06 October 
2017. 
[11] 
Driver Focus - Telematics Working Group, "Statement Of 
Principles, Criteria And Verification Procedures On Driver 
Interactions With Advanced In-Vehicle Information And 
Communication Systems," Washington, DC, 2006. 
 
 
Figure 1: Lab’s AR HUD can be display graphics that are both 
screen-relative and conformal to the simulated world (top 
left). Top view (right) and side view (bottom right) of driving
simulator
554
Authorized licensed use limited to: Western Sydney University. Downloaded on July 25,2020 at 18:39:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


