Quantifying Distraction Potential of Augmented Reality Head-Up 
Displays for Vehicle Drivers
 
Hyungil Kim and Joseph L. Gabbard 
hy.kim@vt.edu and jgabbard@vt.edu 
Virginia Tech 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Background: A recent National Highway Traffic & Safety 
Administration (NHTSA) report states that 10% of fatal crashes 
and 18% of injury crashes were reported as distraction-affected 
crashes. In that same year, 3,179 people were killed and an 
estimated 431,000 injured in motor vehicle crashes involving 
distracted drivers, many of which involved secondary visual 
displays (NHTSA, 2016). Augmented reality (AR) head-up 
displays (HUD) promise to be less distractive than traditional 
in-vehicle displays since they do not take drivers’ eyes off the 
road (Gabbard, Fitch, & Kim, 2014). However, empirical 
studies have reported possible negative consequences of AR 
HUDs, in part, due to AR graphics’ salience (Sharfi & Shinar, 
2014), frequent changes (Wolffsohn, McBrien, Edgar, & Stout, 
1998), and visual clutter (Burnett & Donkor, 2012). Moreover, 
current in-vehicle display assessment methods which are based 
on eye-off-road time measures (NHTSA, 2012), cannot capture 
this unique challenge. 
Objective: This work aims to propose a new method for the 
assessment of AR HUDs by quantifying both positive 
(informing 
drivers) 
and 
negative 
(distracting 
drivers) 
consequences of AR HUDs which might not be captured by 
current in-vehicle display assessment methods.  
Method: We proposed a new way of quantifying the distraction 
potential of AR HUDs by measuring driver situation awareness 
with operational improvements on the situation awareness 
global assessment technique (Endsley, 2012) to suit AR 
usability evaluations. A human-subject experiment was 
conducted in a driving simulator to apply the proposed method 
and to evaluate two AR HUD interfaces for pedestrian collision 
warning. The AR warning interfaces were prototyped by the 
augmented video technique (Soro, Rakotonirainy, Schroeter, & 
Wollstdter, 2014). Twenty-four participants drove while 
interacting with different types of AR pedestrian collision 
warning interfaces (no warning, bounding box, and virtual 
shadow). Drivers’ situation awareness, confidence, and 
workload were measured and compared to the no warning 
condition. 
Results: Only one of the warning interface designs, the virtual 
shadow (Kim, Isleib, & Gabbard, 2016), improved driver 
situation awareness about pedestrians which were cued by the 
AR HUD, not affecting situation awareness about other 
environmental elements which were not augmented by the 
HUD. The experiment also showed drivers’ overconfidence 
bias while interacting with the bounding box which is another 
warning interface design. The empirical user study did not 
provide any evidence for reduced driver workload when AR 
warnings were given. 
Conclusion: Our initial human-subject study demonstrated a 
potential of the proposed method in quantifying both positive 
and negative consequences of AR HUDs on driver cognitive 
processes. More importantly, the experiment showed that AR 
interfaces can have both positive and negative consequences on 
driver situation awareness depending upon how we design 
perceptual forms of graphical elements. 
Application: The proposed assessment methods for AR HUDs 
can inform not only comparative evaluation among design 
alternatives but also assist in incrementally improving design 
iterations to better support drivers’ information needs, situation 
awareness, and in turn, performance, and safety. 
 
Keywords: driving, driver distraction, augmented reality, head-
up displays, situation awareness. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
We would like to thank Ian Alvarado and Scott Steger for 
their time and effort in data collection and reduction. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Burnett, G., & Donkor, R. (2012). Evaluating the impact of Head-Up Display 
complexity on peripheral detection performance: a driving simulator 
study. Advances in Transportation Studies, 28.  
Endsley, M. R. (2012). Designing for situation awareness: An approach to 
user-centered design: CRC Press. 
Gabbard, J. L., Fitch, G. M., & Kim, H. (2014). Behind the Glass: Driver 
Challenges and Opportunities for AR Automotive Applications. 
Proceedings of the IEEE, 102(2), 124-136.  
Kim, H., Isleib, J. D., & Gabbard, J. L. (2016). Virtual Shadow: Making Cross 
Traffic Dynamics Visible through Augmented Reality Head Up Display. 
Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics 
Society Annual Meeting. 
NHTSA. (2012). Visual-manual NHTSA driver distraction guidelines for in-
vehicle electronic devices. Washington, DC: National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration (NHTSA), Department of Transportation (DOT).  
NHTSA. (2016). Traffic safety facts 2014. Traffic Safety Facts FARS/GES 
Annual Report(DOT HS 812 261).  
Sharfi, T., & Shinar, D. (2014). Enhancement of road delineation can reduce 
safety. Journal of Safety Research, 49(0), 61.e61-68.  
Soro, A., Rakotonirainy, A., Schroeter, R., & Wollstdter, S. (2014). Using 
Augmented Video to Test In-Car User Experiences of Context Analog 
HUDs. Paper presented at the Adjunct Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive 
Vehicular Applications, Seattle, WA, USA.  
Wolffsohn, J. S., McBrien, N. A., Edgar, G. K., & Stout, T. (1998). The 
influence of cognition and age on accommodation, detection rate and 
response times when using a car head-up display (HUD). Ophthalmic and 
Physiological Optics, 18(3), 243-253. doi:10.1046/j.1475-
1313.1998.00350.x 
 
Copyright 2018 by Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. DOI 10.1177/1541931218621436
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 2018 Annual Meeting
1923


