 Augmented reality head-up displays effect on drivers’ 
spatial knowledge acquisition 
 
Nayara de Oliveira Faria, Dina Kandil and Joseph L. Gabbard 
nfaria@vt.edu, dinak@vt.edu and jgabbard@vt.edu 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Background: Drivers gather most of the information they need 
to drive by looking at the world around them and at visual 
displays within the vehicle. Navigation systems automate the 
way drivers navigate. In using these systems, drivers offload 
both tactical (route following) and strategic aspects (route 
planning) of navigational tasks to the automated SatNav 
system, freeing up cognitive and attentional resources that can 
be used in other tasks (Burnett, 2009).  Despite the potential 
benefits and opportunities that navigation systems provide, 
their use can also be problematic. For example, research 
suggests that drivers using SatNav do not develop as much 
environmental spatial knowledge as drivers using paper maps 
(Waters & Winter, 2011; Parush, Ahuvia, & Erev, 2007).  With 
recent growth and advances of augmented reality (AR) head-up 
displays (HUDs), there are new opportunities to display 
navigation information directly within a driver’s forward field 
of view, allowing them to gather information needed to 
navigate without looking away from the road. While the 
technology is promising, the nuances of interface design and its 
impacts on drivers must be further understood before AR can 
be widely and safely incorporated into vehicles. Specifically, an 
impact that warrants investigation is the role of AR HUDS in 
spatial knowledge acquisition while driving. Acquiring high 
levels of spatial knowledge is crucial for navigation tasks 
because individuals who have greater levels of spatial 
knowledge acquisition are more capable of navigating based on 
their own internal knowledge (Bolton, Burnett, & Large, 2015). 
Moreover, the ability to develop an accurate and comprehensive 
cognitive map acts as a social function in which individuals are 
able to navigate for others, provide verbal directions and sketch 
direction maps (Hill, 1987). Given these points, the relationship 
between spatial knowledge acquisition and novel technologies 
such as AR HUDs in driving is a relevant topic for 
investigation. 
 
Objectives: This work explored whether providing conformal 
AR navigational cues improves spatial knowledge acquisition 
(as compared to traditional HUD visual cues) to assess the 
plausibility and justification for investment in generating larger 
FOV AR HUDs with potentially multiple focal planes.   
 
Methods: This study employed a 2x2 between-subjects design 
in which twenty-four participants were counterbalanced by 
gender. We used a fixed base, medium fidelity driving 
simulator for where participants drove while navigating with 
one of two possible HUD interface designs: a world-relative 
arrow post sign and a screen-relative traditional arrow. During 
the 10-15 minute drive, participants drove the route and were 
encouraged to verbally share feedback as they proceeded. After 
the drive, participants completed a NASA-TLX questionnaire 
to record their perceived workload. We measured spatial 
knowledge at two levels: landmark and route knowledge. 
Landmark knowledge was assessed using an iconic recognition 
task, while route knowledge was assessed using a scene 
ordering task. After completion of the study, individuals signed 
a post-trial consent form and were compensated $10 for their 
time. 
 
Results: NASA-TLX performance subscale ratings revealed 
that participants felt that they performed better during the 
world-relative condition but at a higher rate of perceived 
workload. However, in terms of perceived workload, results 
suggest there is no significant difference between interface 
design conditions. Landmark knowledge results suggest that the 
mean number of remembered scenes among both conditions is 
statistically similar, indicating participants using both interface 
designs remembered the same proportion of on-route scenes. 
Deviance analysis show that only maneuver direction had an 
influence on landmark knowledge testing performance. Route 
knowledge results suggest that the proportion of scenes on-
route which were correctly sequenced by participants is similar 
under both conditions. Finally, participants exhibited poorer 
performance in the route knowledge task as compared to 
landmark knowledge task (independent of HUD interface 
design).  
 
Conclusions: This study described a driving simulator study 
which evaluated the head-up provision of two types of AR 
navigation interface designs. The world-relative condition 
placed an artificial post sign at the corner of an approaching 
intersection containing a real landmark. The screen-relative 
condition displayed turn directions using a screen-fixed 
traditional arrow located directly ahead of the participant on the 
right or left side on the HUD.  Overall results of this initial study 
provide evidence that the use of both screen-relative and world-
relative AR head-up display interfaces have similar impact on 
spatial knowledge acquisition and perceived workload while 
driving. These results contrast a common perspective in the AR 
community that conformal, world-relative graphics are 
inherently more effective. This study instead suggests that 
simple, screen-fixed designs may indeed be effective in certain 
contexts. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Bolton, A., Burnett, G., & Large, D. (2015). An investigation of Augmented 
Reality Presentations of Landmark-Based Navigation using Head-
Up Display. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on 
Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications, 
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 2019 Annual Meeting
Copyright 2019 by Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. DOI 10.1177/1071181319631287
1486


(pp. 
56-63). 
Nottingham, 
United 
Kingdom. 
doi:10.1145/2799250.2799253 
Burnett, G. (2009). On-the-Move and in Your Car: An Overview of HCI Issues 
for In-Car Computing. International Journal of Mobile Human 
Computer 
Interaction, 
60-78. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-499-
8.ch004 
Hill, M. (1987). Asking Directions and pedestrian wayfinding. Asking 
Directions and pedestrian wayfinding. Man-Environment Systems, 
17(4), 113-1120.  
Parush, A., Ahuvia, S., & Erev, I. (2007). Degradation in Spatial Knowledge 
Acquisition When Using Automatic Navigation Systems. 8th 
International Conference, COSIT 2007 (pp. 238-254). Melbourne, 
Australia: Springer. 
Waters, W., & Winter, S. (2011). A wayfinding aid to increase navigator 
independence. Journal of Spatial Information Science, 103-122. 
doi:10.5311/JOSIS.2011.3.43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 2019 Annual Meeting
1487


