i-com 2019; 18(2): 127–149
Research Article
Andreas Riegler*, Philipp Wintersberger, Andreas Riener, and Clemens Holzmann
Augmented Reality Windshield Displays and Their
Potential to Enhance User Experience in
Automated Driving
https://doi.org/10.1515/icom-2018-0033
Abstract: Increasing vehicle automation presents chal-
lenges as drivers of highly automated vehicles become
more disengaged from the primary driving task. However,
even with fully automated driving, there will still be activ-
ities that require interfaces for vehicle-passenger interac-
tions. Windshield displays are a technology with a promis-
ing potential for automated driving, as they are able to pro-
vide large content areas supporting drivers in non-driving
related activities. However, it is still unknown how poten-
tial drivers or passengers would use these displays. This
work addresses user preferences for windshield displays
in automated driving. Participants of a user study (N = 63)
were presented two levels of automation (conditional and
full), and could freely choose preferred positions, con-
tent types, as well as size, transparency levels and impor-
tance levels of content windows using a simulated “ideal”
windshield display. We visualized the results in form of
heatmap data which show that user preferences differ with
respect to the level of automation, age, gender, or environ-
ment aspects. These insights can help designers of interi-
ors and in-vehicle applications to provide a rich user expe-
rience in highly automated vehicles.
Keywords: windshield displays, head-up displays, user
preferences, automated driving, heatmaps
1 Introduction
The provision of automated driving systems promises ad-
vantages for societies and individuals, such as increased
*Corresponding author: Andreas Riegler, University of Applied
Sciences Upper Austria, Department of Energy and Mobility,
Hagenberg, Austria, e-mail: andreas.riegler@fh-hagenberg.at
Philipp Wintersberger, Andreas Riener, Technische Hochschule
Ingolstadt, Ingolstadt, Germany, e-mails:
philipp.wintersberger@carissma.eu, andreas.riener@thi.de
Clemens Holzmann, University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria,
Department of Energy and Mobility, Hagenberg, Austria, e-mail:
clemens.holzmann@fh-ooe.at
safety, improved traffic efficiency, or mobility for the im-
paired [33, 8]. Still, the potentially most promising benefit
for consumers is the possibility to engage in non-driving
related tasks (NDRTs). Many desired activities are web-
browsing, texting, or media consumption [19]. Since tech-
nological advances could soon lead to display technolo-
gies, such as windshield displays (WSDs, augmented real-
ity head up displays that cover the whole windshield [9]),
new opportunities will arise to convert vehicles into info-
tainment platforms [24]. However, when thinking about vi-
sionary vehicle interiors, one must consider the different
levels of automation [2], that pose different requirements
on driver-vehicle cooperation. For example, in SAE level 5,
the vehicle is able to perform the entire dynamic driving
task without any need of a human operator, while in level
3, drivers must be prepared to resume control any time,
and on short notice. This issues a number of challenges
to automotive user interfaces, such as increased workload
or stress resulting from frequent task switching [34]. Ad-
ditionally, future vehicle concepts (such as the VW I.D.,
the Audi Aicon, or the Mercedes F105) often show chrome-
less designs and allow driver-passengers to freely rotate
seats, which highlights the need for new visualization and
interaction concepts. WSDs could thereby become a valu-
able technology in the gradual transformation from semi-
to fully automated vehicles ([12], [26]), as they provide var-
ious benefits: They eliminate physical and visual clutter
in the center console and thereby enable gesture-based
interaction [23]. Instead of having various functionalities
spread around the driver’s seat, WSDs can provide a sin-
gle interface for all in-vehicle infotainment systems [4].
Potential dangers can be visualized directly in the field
of view, what enhances safety for vulnerable road users
or drivers with cognitive impairments [15]. Also, context-
aware information such as displaying messages or aug-
menting points of interest [7], advertisements [3] or nav-
igational aids [6] can be presented. Additionally, WSDs
could allow world-fixed augmented reality visualizations
that support users in the perception of the outside environ-
ment. The large interaction space of WSDs could further
be utilized in side activities, and vehicles could transform
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


128
|
A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
into mobile cinemas or extended office environments [28].
However, little research has been conducted on how po-
tential users would use these displays, which information
they desire, or where content should be located. We don’t
know whether users accept that they have no direct per-
ception of the outside environment (especially what is in
front of the vehicle), and if semi-transparent content could
help to increase acceptance in vehicle automation. We hy-
pothesize that the answers to these questions are highly
sensitive to the level of automation and/or user character-
istics. To shine light on the matter, we aimed at revealing
user preferences in this novel display technology and eval-
uate its applicability in the context of automated driving.
This paper is structured as follows: in section two we
present recent research on WSDs and augmented reality in
driving applications. We present our experimental design
and the addressed research questions in sections three
and four. Results are reported with respect to different lev-
els of automation, content types, transparency levels, as
well as age, gender and environment aspects in section
five. After a rigorous discussion of the implications of our
experiment (section six), we discuss potential limitations
and conclude with an outlook on future work in sections
seven and eight.
2 Augmented Reality Windshield
Displays
In the context of manual driving, the potential of aug-
mented reality (AR) applications has already been shown.
For example, Smith et a. [30] could demonstrate that pre-
senting information directly in a driver’s line of sight can
increase driving performance and diminish distraction.
Approaches utilizing head-up displays (HUDs) thus of-
ten aim to increase safety. Park, Lee and Kim [18] used
radar sensor information to generate enhanced forward
collision warnings. A similar concept was shown by Hu
et al. [10], who directly provided night-vision systems for
drivers. Tangmanee and Teeravanrunyou [32] augmented
the brake way of the ego vehicle to prevent crashes. Lorenz
et al. [16] supported the driver with augmented reality sce-
nario information during the transition from automated
to manual driving to increase their situation awareness.
In the future, WSDs could support cooperative, intelligent
transportation systems (C-ITS), that dynamically adjust
road configurations to maximize throughput, by provid-
ing dynamic, real-time visualizations of traffic signs, lane
markings, etc. [25].
Applications using WSDs are expected to improve in-
vehicle experiences and ease the implementation of auto-
mated vehicles in the transition phase [12]. However, be-
cause of technical but also cost issues, WSDs have not
yet been developed. According to Gabbard et al. [4], this
could become the greatest hurdle preventing their utiliza-
tion in the near future. Currently, AR-HUDs face problems
like change blindness [20], or limited interaction space
and field of view. Future technologies, such as optical
see through light-field displays [14] could eliminate these
problems and finally allow WSDs that cover the entire
windshield.
The drivers’ preferences when it comes to automated
driving have already been explored, however, mostly re-
garding trust and acceptance of the technology in general.
For example, users would use the time spent on NDRTs
on working, reading, and playing games [17]. We intend
to go a step further by letting the potential users choose
what content should be placed at the WSD and how it
should behave in terms of transparency, size etc. In the
meantime, the potential of WSDs can be demonstrated
and evaluated using software simulation. Häuslschmid
et al. [7] developed a generalizable view management for
manual vehicles that considers drivers’ tasks, context, re-
sources, and abilities for efficient information recognition
and comprehension. They proposed zones and areas for
specific information types, ranging from pre-attentive and
safety-critical messages, to attentive, less critical informa-
tion such as personal email. The presented view manage-
ment proposes certain areas for specific information, such
as personal information, vehicle information, warnings
etc. [7] We chose to eliminate all potential restrictions of
such settings, and designed an experiment aiming to re-
veal driver-passengers’ requirements and preferences in
WSDs, and thereby distinguished between different con-
tent types and levels of automation.
3 User Study
3.1 Method and Research Questions
To evaluate how AR WSDs can be utilized in highly auto-
mated vehicles, as well as by whom and in what situation
content should be displayed on the WSD, we performed
a user study. We wanted to investigate the following re-
search questions:
–
RQ1: Which, and how many areas on WSDs do drivers
of automated vehicles prefer for displaying informa-
tion?
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
|
129
–
RQ2: How does the level of automation (conditional,
full) influence drivers’ preferences?
–
RQ3: Which size and format (widescreen, portrait) of
content areas is desired?
–
RQ4: Is there a hidden agreement on the display
location of types of in-vehicle information (vehicle-
related, trip-related, entertainment, etc.)?
–
RQ5: Which level of background transparency of con-
tent areas is desired?
–
RQ6: Are certain content types perceived as more im-
portant than others?
–
RQ7: Does gender influence drivers’ preferences?
–
RQ8: Does age influence drivers’ preferences?
–
RQ9: Does the driving environment (highway, urban)
influence drivers’ preferences?
Our study setting enables users to freely set the position,
size, transparency and importance of multiple content
windows (represented as rectangles) on a WSD. We choose
to conduct our evaluation on a two-dimensional display,
since mixed display distances can have a negative impact
on performance [31], and we wanted to design the study
setting as simple as possible. With assistance of our exper-
imenters, participants were asked to draw multiple rectan-
gles on the WSD (see Figure 1) according to their personal
Figure 1: The study setting, a 55” flat screen monitor and a computer
mouse for drawing and placing the content windows.
preferences, and afterwards associate each content area
with different types of information (e. g. warnings, vehicle-
related information, entertainment, social media, etc.) as
well as the background transparency and importance. We
decided to use rectangles as content windows only as this
shape is most commonly used in applications in many
domains, such as desktop computers, tablets, or smart-
phones. Further, demographic data and survey questions
related to WSDs and automated driving were obtained.
Both the demographic questionnaire and the survey were
presented to the participants on a tablet computer. In ad-
dition, our experimenters were constantly observing the
participants’ remarks and, using the laddering technique,
tried to ascertain further information about participants’
motives and notions.
3.2 Experimental Design
For conducting the experiment we created two three di-
mensional scenes in Unity3D, that show the interior of a
right-hand driven BMW i8 from the driver’s perspective.
For the level 5 scenario we modified the cockpit by remov-
ing the steering wheel as well as the gear shift to empha-
size that the driver cannot take over the vehicle, as op-
posed to the level 3 scenario. Either model was then placed
on a highway road and on a city crossing surrounded by
skyscrapers (see Figures 2a and 2b). We set the scene as
background image and used a drawing application (with
a custom view consisting of only necessary tools, such as
the possibility to draw rectangles) as interface for the ex-
periment. While this static setup is technically simple, the
solution has multiple benefits. First, the drawing applica-
tion is well known and widely used, thus we did not have
to explain the process of drawing to our participants, and
second, it easily allowed to group the different rectangles,
what eased evaluation and subsequent heatmap genera-
tion. The application was then displayed to participants
(a) City scene.
(b) Highway scene.
Figure 2: 3D environments for situational analysis (vehicle interior not displayed).
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


130
|
A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
in fullscreen/borderless mode on a 55” flat screen monitor
with a resolution of 3840x2160px (see Figure 1).
3.3 Procedure
First, participants had to complete a short demographic
questionnaire, including age, gender, highest level of ed-
ucation, if they possess a valid driving license, and the
approximate covered annual vehicle volume (driven by
them). We explained conditional and fully automated driv-
ing. For the conditional driving scenario we told partici-
pants that situations where the driver has to actively take
control of the vehicle can arise at any time. For the fully au-
tomated driving scenario, we noted that the vehicle cannot
be controlled by the driver in any way, which was under-
lined by the lack of a steering wheel and gear shift in the
visualization of the vehicle’s cockpit. We further explained
the concept of a windshield display and emphasized the
precedence of a safe but also comfortable drive. Addition-
ally, we told participants to imagine sitting alone in the
vehicle, and that the vehicle is their own (i. e., no public
transport vehicle with strangers). Then, participants were
presented the drawing application, and we asked them
to draw multiple rectangles within the boundaries of the
WSD according to their preferences. For each window, par-
ticipants had to specify the desired content type (by drag
and drop). According to a study conducted by McKinsey
[17], drivers have certain preferences for activities in auto-
mated vehicles. Therefore, we offered a list containing po-
tential content types:
–
Warnings (W), such as a potentially short headway,
mechanical failures, etc.
–
Vehicle information (V), such as the current speed, or
distance/time to destination
–
Work/office related information (O), such as emails or
calendar
–
Entertainment (E), such as music playlists, videos, etc.
–
Social Media (S), such as Facebook, Twitter, etc.
–
Custom/Other (C), such as weather information,
smarthome control, etc.
It was allowed to overlap windows and there was no re-
quirement to use all content types, and a single content
type could be assigned multiple times if desired. In case
a participant wanted to display multiple content types in-
side a single rectangle, we counted this as two different
windows in our evaluation. For example, if a participant
wanted to see both social media, as well as work-related
content, in one and the same rectangle (“content win-
dow”), we regarded this as two windows with one being
dedicated to social media, and the other to office/work.
For each content window, participants were asked to set
its background transparency using a slider. Additionally,
participants had to specify which content windows they
perceived as more important than others, by dragging their
layers in the desired order (top was higher importance/pri-
ority). This procedure was performed twice, for both con-
ditions level 3 and level 5 driving (in randomized order).
Therefore, each participant was exposed to a total of two
conditions, e. g. the level 3 city scenario and the level 5
highway scenario. Before each condition we explained the
corresponding level of automation to participants. After
both conditions, participants had to complete a short post-
questionnaire on a tablet. This survey aimed to get insights
about participants’ attitude towards WSDs and AR in driv-
ing automation. The experiment lasted approximately 30
minutes for each participant.
4 Results
In total, 63 people (44 male, 19 female) between 17 and
81 (37 + / −19.7) years participated in the experiment (all
possessing a valid driver’s license). In our university, we
recruited students, researchers, and teaching assistants.
Additionally, we invited external people to take part in
our study while attending information days about the uni-
versity. For recruiting elderly participants, we organized a
“senior citizen day” at our university, where we also ex-
plained the concept of automated vehicles, as well as fu-
ture interaction possibilities with vehicles. All participants
were from Central Europe. Because of the age heterogene-
ity, we created a simple study setup that all participants
could use with ease.
Statistical results presented were conducted using
IBM SPSS Version 24 with a significance level of p < .05.
Not all of our data was normally distributed, and since the
sample size of the different content types was not equal,
we conducted pairwise comparisons utilizing Wilcoxon
signed rank tests for within-subjects effects, and Mann-
Whitney U tests for between subjects evaluations, both
with Bonferroni correction for alpha-adjusted significance
levels.
In the following, we present a detailed investigation
of the obtained results. In section 4.1, we describe general
findings in WSD preferences between level 3 and level 5 au-
tomation, and visualize them with heatmaps. We further
take an in-depth look at the different content types and
their usage in section 4.2. Additionally, we look at window
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
|
131
parameters, such as transparency (section 4.3) and impor-
tance (section 4.4). Moreover, we investigate user prefer-
ences depending on participants’ age (section 4.5), gen-
der (section 4.6) and the environment (section 4.7). Finally,
we reveal insights into the qualitative feedback from our
participants (section 4.8) and their survey responses (sec-
tion 4.9).
4.1 Window Characteristics and Heatmaps
On average, participants utilized 3.59 (Std = 1.41) content
windows in level 3, and 4.29 (Std = 1.68) content windows
in level 5 driving. The difference is statistically significant
at p = .001. The window format (based on divergence to a
square) was strongly in favor of landscape (L3 = 197, L5 =
230 counts) compared to portrait (total numbers: L3 = 29,
L5 = 40 counts).
Figures 3a and 3b show the heatmaps generated from
the aggregated data. Based on the drawn windows, we
generated heatmaps. Overlapping windows are displayed
by color gradients from green to red (red means more over-
lapping windows at the respective location), blue areas in-
dicate that no window was placed at the respective loca-
tion. Using this visual technique, it is instantly possible to
see the main difference between level 3 and level 5 automa-
tion: The requirement to be able to take control of the driv-
ing task in conditionally automated vehicles made many
(a) Level 3 heatmap.
(b) Level 5 heatmap.
Figure 3: Resulting heatmaps based on the aggregation of the indi-
vidual content windows for level 3 and 5 automated driving scenar-
ios.
participants avoid to place information in the direct line
of sight (with one exception: warnings). Also, content was
often placed in the imagined extension of the middle con-
sole or on the top left corner of the WSD (Figure 3a). In con-
trast, in the level 5 driving scenario, participants placed
content windows all over the WSD, mostly in the driver’s
foveal area. Considering the window dimensions as speci-
fied by participants shows, that in level 5 the average size
(Mean = 249937, Std = 324671 square pixels) was nearly
twice as high than in level 3 (Mean = 131403, Std = 160796
square pixels) driving and showed also greater variance
(see Figure 3b). We further take an in-depth look at the dif-
ferent content types in section 4.2.
4.2 Content Types
Additionally, we created different heatmaps for the indi-
vidual content types and also counted their occurrences in
different areas of the WSD. Each window was assigned to
one out of 9 different locations, i. e. top, center, bottom and
driver (left), middle and passenger (right) side, based on
its center point belonging to the corresponding location,
distorted to fit the camera projection. Figures 3a and 3b
show the grid ranging over the entire WSD. Table 1 displays
the number/share of windows for each content type. We
further calculated the share (percentage) of the windows
belonging to a corresponding content type in relation to
the total size of all windows used. In level 3 driving, warn-
ings (W) and vehicle-related dashboards (V) were not only
the most-used content types, they also received the (rela-
tively) largest space (around 30 %).
Considering the average total size of the different con-
tent types’ drawn windows (see Table 2 for descriptive
statistics), pairwise comparisons with an alpha-adjusted
significance level of .003 show only one significant effect
for level 3 driving: warnings (W) were significantly larger
than vehicle-related dashboards (V, p < .001).
Level 5 automation shows a clear distinction: in this
case, warnings were used less. Although, for example, the
total number of vehicle-related dashboards V was similar
to level 3 driving, the size of their windows was smaller.
Contrarily, entertainment (E), work-related (O), and social
media (S) content was desired more by the participants
with more than 80 % of the total interaction space used
(see Table 1). In level 5 driving, various differences could
be evaluated. Not only warnings (W, p < .001), also work-
related (O, p < .001), entertainment (E, p < .001), and so-
cial media windows (S, p < .001) were significantly larger
than vehicle-related dashboards (V). Overall, the share of
the total size roughly corresponds to the percentage of the
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


132
|
A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
Table 1: Comparison of the different content types and their counts specified by participants.
Content Type
W
V
O
E
S
C
Level 3
N = 226
Counts /
Percentage
64
28,32 %
59
26.11 %
38
16.81 %
38
16.81 %
23
10.18 %
4
1.77 %
Share of
total size
29.09 %
16.08 %
17.21 %
24.34 %
11.82 %
1.46 %
Level 5
N = 270
Counts /
Percentage
43
15.93 %
61
22.59 %
53
19.63 %
56
20.74 %
49
18.15 %
8
2.96
Share of
total size
10.96 %
7.62 %
23.37 %
34.94 %
20.83 %
2.28 %
Table 2: Comparison of the different content types and their sizes specified by participants.
Content Type
W
V
O
E
S
C
Level 3
N = 226
Mean Size
(Sq pixels)
134975
80959
134487
190199
152612
108470
Std
(Sq pixels)
124131
79074
135354
282150
157715
67730
Level 5
N = 270
Mean Size
(Sq pixels)
172019
84308
297575
421026
286852
192357
Std
(Sq pixels)
249429
61885
307664
456418
324182
194140
window counts. In the following, we give further insights
into the different content types.
Warnings (W) have been utilized more often in level
3, compared to level 5 driving (L3 = 64, L5 = 43). In both
levels, they were prominently placed in the field of view of
the driver (see Figures 4a, 4b).
Vehicle-related dashboards (V) have been placed just
above the steering wheel in level 3, a location already uti-
lized by available head-up displays (Figure 4c). Addition-
ally, the top driver side of the WSD is a location often uti-
lized for this content type. This also applies to level 5 driv-
ing (Figure 4d). Although the number of windows for this
content type is nearly equal in both conditions (L3 = 59,
L5 = 61), the importance drastically differs between the
autonomy levels. In level 3, (V) accounts for about 16 % of
the total area used, while in level 5 less than 8 % of the
space was reserved for this content type (see Table 1).
Larger differences between the levels of automation
become visible when considering windows for non-driving
related tasks. The three content types office/work O, en-
tertainment E, and social media S were not placed promi-
nently in the drivers field of view in level 3 driving, but
more in the peripheral areas from the driver’s point of
view (see Figures 4e, 4g, 4i). Participants have put them
mainly in the center (vertical extension of center con-
sole) and partly on the passenger’s side. Also the size of
the windows for these content types was relatively small
compared to level 5. In level 5, office/work and entertain-
ment content was placed directly on the driver’s side in
large windows – entertainment content even larger, rang-
ing nearly across the whole WSD (see Figure 4h). Windows
displaying social-media feeds/activities (S) were utilized
more often in level 5 driving (L3 = 23, L5 = 49). In con-
trast to entertainment and office/work windows, partici-
pants chose various locations on the drivers, center, and
passenger side for social media related information (see
Figure 4j). Custom content (C) has been scarcely utilized
(L3 = 4, L5 = 8), therefore we do not present heat maps
for this content type. Regarding differences between the
number of windows placed for conditional and full au-
tomation, we found that in full automation, significantly
more windows were drawn. Since there is no take-over re-
quirement for fully automated vehicles, and “drivers” can
take advantage of not having to pay attention to the pri-
mary driving task, this result seems legitimate. Addition-
ally, we looked at inter-level differences between the av-
erage total size of content windows. We found significant
differences between the window size of work-related, and
entertainment windows (O: p < .001, E: p < .001) using
Wilcoxon signed rank tests; larger windows in level 5 au-
tomation. However, there are no statistical differences in
window sizes for the other content types (however social
media content S, p = 0.13 was just slightly above the ad-
justed significance level of .0083). In other cases, the win-
dows are similarly dimensioned for both levels of automa-
tion.
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
|
133
(a) Level 3 heatmap displaying warning windows (W).
(b) Level 5 heatmap displaying warning windows (W).
(c) Level 3 heatmap displaying vehicle-related windows (V).
(d) Level 5 heatmap displaying vehicle-related windows (V).
(e) Level 3 heatmap displaying work-related windows (O).
(f) Level 5 heatmap displaying work-related windows (O).
(g) Level 3 heatmap displaying entertainment windows (E).
(h) Level 5 heatmap displaying entertainment windows (E).
(i) Level 3 heatmap displaying social media windows (S).
(j) Level 5 heatmap displaying social media windows (S).
Figure 4: Heatmaps for level 3 (left) and level 5 (right) automation.
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


134
|
A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
4.3 Transparency
Using a slider, participants were able to set their preferred
opacity level for each drawn window. Minimum was an
opacity of 0 % (transparency = 100 %), maximum was an
opacity of 100 % (transparency = 0 %). The default opac-
ity value was 100 % in order for the participants to fully
see the window(s) they are drawing.
Figure 5: Transparency preferences for each content type for level 3
(blue) and level 5 (orange) automation.
Figure 5 shows the transparency results for level 3 and
level 5 automation for each content type. In both levels,
warning windows (W) received the highest opacity. Since
there was an unequal number of data points (not each par-
ticipant utilized each content type), we performed only
pairwise comparisons using Wilcoxon signed rank tests
with an alpha adjusted significance level of .003. In level
3 driving only two comparisons yielded to significant ef-
fects: warnings W had higher opacity than vehicle-related
dashboards V (p = .002) and work-related content win-
dows O (p = .002). For level 5 driving, no such difference
could be evaluated.
When comparing inter-level differences in windows
transparency using Wilcoxon signed rank tests, we found
that level 5 work-related content (O), entertainment (E)
and social media content (S) received a statistically signif-
icant higher opacity than their counterparts in level 3 (O:
p = 002, E: p < .001, S: p = .003). We believe that since
take-over requests are not needed or even possible in fully
automated driving, “drivers” tend to focus on in-vehicle ac-
tivities such as reading emails, watching movies etc. which
require less transparent windows.
Furthermore, we wanted to find out if there is a cor-
relation between the parameters area and transparency.
We did not find relevant area-transparency correlations
for level 3 automation. However, for the level 5 scenario,
we found weak positive correlations for the content types
work-related content, entertainment and social media
content (O: ρ = 27.9 %, E: ρ = 30.8 %, S: ρ = 27.1 %). In
these cases, larger windows were attributed with a higher
opacity by the participants.
4.4 Importance
We further investigated the importance resp. priority for
each drawn window. Participants were able to subjectively
rate their drawn windows. The highest priority was 1, the
maximum priority was determined by the number of win-
dows and it was possible to rate windows as equal. This
procedure was done by the participant or experimenter by
dragging the window layers on the right side of the screen
into the desired order.
Figure 6: Importance preferences for each content type for level
3 (blue) and level 5 (orange) automation (lower values represent
higher priority).
Figure 6 shows the subjectively given importance re-
sults for level 3 and level 5 for each content type. Lower
scores are better/indicate a higher subjective priority. One
can instantly see that warnings received the highest im-
portance for both level 3 and level 5 driving. Since also
here the number of data points for each content type varies
we again conducted pairwise comparisons using Wilcoxon
signed rank tests with an alpha-adjusted significance level
of .003. Warnings W were rated to be significantly more
important than vehicle-related dashboards V (p < .001),
work-related content O (p < .001), entertainment win-
dows E (p < .001), and social media content S (p < .001).
Vehicle-related dashboards V were significantly more im-
portant than work-related content O (p < .001), entertain-
ment E (p < .001), and social media windows S (p < .001),
and finally work-related content O was more important
than social media S (p = .002).
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
|
135
In level 5 driving we obtained a similar result: warn-
ings W were more important than vehicle-related dash-
boards V p < .001, entertainment E (p = .001), and so-
cial media windows S (p < .001); work-related content
O was rated to be more important than social media S
(p = .002). Regarding the inter-level difference between
the content types and their perceived importance (based
on an alpha adjusted significance level of .0083), warnings
(W, p = .003) and vehicle-related dashboards (V, p = .002)
received a significantly higher priority in level 3 than in
level 5. No other differences between the level of automa-
tion could be evaluated.
Furthermore, we wanted to find out if there is a cor-
relation between the parameters transparency and im-
portance. For level 3 automation, we found a weak pos-
itive correlation between the transparency of social me-
dia windows and their subjectively rated importance (ρ =
30.0 %), i. e. the more opaque the window, the higher its
importance as stated by the participants. We did not find
any other relevant transparency-importance correlations
for level 3 automation. However, for the level 5 scenario,
we calculated weak positive correlations for the content
types work-related content, entertainment and social me-
dia content (O: ρ = 26.7 %, E: ρ = 29.3 %, S: ρ = 27.0 %).
Additionally, we wanted to find out if there is a corre-
lation between the parameters area and importance. For
warnings, there is a weak positive correlation between
their area and subjective importance (ρ
=
22.3 %) in
level 3 automation. This means that larger windows are
seen as more important. This is similar to vehicle-related
dashboards (ρ = 24.5 %). In contrast, the areas of work-
related content, entertainment and social media content
were moderately negatively correlated with their perceived
importance (O: ρ = −43.5 %, E: ρ = −30.6 %, S: ρ =
−19.4 %). This may be because these content types are not
well suited for conditional automation because of poten-
tial take-over tasks at any point in time. For level 5 automa-
tion, the parameters area and importance are very weakly
correlated (|ρ| < 20 %).
4.5 Age Specific Differences
We further separated the participants in two groups, 47
younger drivers (Mean = 27, Std = 6.1) and 16 elderly
drivers (Mean = 69, Std = 8.9) to investigate potential
differences in their WSD preferences. Figure 7 displays the
overall results for level 3 and level 5 driving, differentiated
by young and elderly drivers, respectively.
While in level 3 driving, young drivers prefer content
windows to be positioned all over the windshield, most
prominently in the driver’s direct field of view, elderly
drivers tend to place their content windows mostly in the
direct field of view and the top part of the windshield dis-
play. In level 5 driving, young participants chose the en-
tire windshield display for their content windows, while
elderly participants utilized the windshield display more
sparingly.
(a) Level 3 heatmap generated from young drivers’ preferences.
(b) Level 3 heatmap generated from elderly drivers’ preferences.
(c) Level 5 heatmap generated from young drivers’ preferences.
(d) Level 5 heatmap generated from elderly drivers’ preferences.
Figure 7: Heatmaps for level 3 (top) and level 5 (bottom) automation; differentiated by young (left) vs. elderly (right) drivers.
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


136
|
A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
(a) Heatmap displaying warning windows (W) according to young
drivers.
(b) Heatmap displaying warning windows (W) according to elderly
drivers.
(c) Heatmap displaying vehicle-related windows (V) according to
young drivers.
(d) Heatmap displaying vehicle-related windows (V) according to
elderly drivers.
(e) Heatmap displaying work-related windows (O) according to
young drivers.
(f) Heatmap displaying work-related windows (O) according to el-
derly drivers.
(g) Heatmap displaying entertainment windows (E) according to
young drivers.
(h) Heatmap displaying entertainment windows (E) according to
elderly drivers.
(i) Heatmap displaying social media windows (S) according to young
drivers.
(j) Heatmap displaying social media windows (S) according to el-
derly drivers.
Figure 8: Level 3 heatmaps displaying the WSD preferences for young (left) and elderly (right) drivers.
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
|
137
(a) Heatmap displaying warning windows (W) according to young
drivers.
(b) Heatmap displaying warning windows (W) according to elderly
drivers.
(c) Heatmap displaying vehicle-related windows (V) according to
young drivers.
(d) Heatmap displaying vehicle-related windows (V) according to
elderly drivers.
(e) Heatmap displaying work-related windows (O) according to
young drivers.
(f) Heatmap displaying work-related windows (O) according to el-
derly drivers.
(g) Heatmap displaying entertainment windows (E) according to
young drivers.
(h) Heatmap displaying entertainment windows (E) according to
elderly drivers.
(i) Heatmap displaying social media windows (S) according to young
drivers.
(j) Heatmap displaying social media windows (S) according to el-
derly drivers.
Figure 9: Level 5 heatmaps displaying the WSD preferences for young (left) and elderly (right) drivers.
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


138
|
A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
In level 3 driving, young participants utilized 3.9 con-
tent windows on average (Std = 1.40), while elderly drivers
only placed 2.7 content windows (Std = 1.01). The differ-
ence is statistically significant (p = .002). In level 5 driv-
ing, young participants averaged 4.8 windows (Std = 1.45),
and elderly participants used 2.9 windows (Std = 1.54).
In the level 5 scenario, this difference is also significant
(p < 0.001).
Regarding the area of content windows in level 3 driv-
ing, young participants used larger areas for all content
types. In contrast, in level 5 driving, elderly participants
choose larger content windows for vehicle-related dash-
boards (V). However, we did not find any significant dif-
ferences in both scenarios utilizing Mann-Whitney U tests.
Even though elderly drivers preferred all their content
windows to be less transparent than their younger coun-
terparts, the use of transparency did not show any signif-
icant differences in the level 3 driving scenario. In con-
trast, elderly participants chose less transparent windows
for various content types (V: p = 0.023, O: p = 0.029,
E: p = 0.02, S: p = 0.017) in level 5 driving. However,
these differences are only tendencies and do not match the
alpha-adjusted significance level of .0083.
Furthermore, in level 3 driving, we found that elderly
participants prioritized work-related content (O) signifi-
cantly higher than younger drivers (p = .006), while in
the level 5 scenario, elderly participants rated both work-
related (O, p = .005) and vehicle-related content (V, p =
.007) to be more important. Other significant differences
could not be assessed.
Figures 8 and 9 show the level 3 and level 5 heatmaps
for each content type, with the distinction for the age of
the drivers, i. e., younger vs. elderly drivers.
4.6 Gender Specific Differences
We additionally investigated the role of gender in auto-
mated driving and their differences in WSD preferences.
Figure 10 displays the overall results for level 3 and level 5
driving, differentiated by male and female drivers, respec-
tively.
For level 3 driving, one can instantly see differences
in male and female preferences for window placements.
While male participants prominently placed content in the
driver’s field of view, and additionally utilizing large parts
of the WSD (see heatmap 10a), female participants focused
their content windows in the bottom as well as the top (left
and center) areas of the WSD (see heatmap 10b). Regarding
level 5 driving, both male and female participants utilized
almost the entire WSD (see Figures 10d and 10c).
In level 3 driving, male participants utilized 3.8 con-
tent windows on average (Std = 1.47), while females only
placed 3.1 content windows (Std = 1.13). The difference is
significant (p = 0.045) considering a Mann-Whitney U test.
In level 5 driving, male participants averaged 4.4 windows
(Std = 1.46), and female participants used 4.1 windows
(a) Level 3 heatmap generated from the male drivers’ preferences.
(b) Level 3 heatmap generated from the female drivers’ preferences.
(c) Level 5 heatmap generated from the male drivers’ preferences.
(d) Level 5 heatmap generated from the female drivers’ preferences.
Figure 10: Heatmaps for level 3 (top) and level 5 (bottom) automation; differentiated by male (left) vs. female (right) drivers.
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
|
139
(Std = 2.13). In the level 5 scenario, this difference is not
statistically significant.
Regarding the area of content windows in level 3 driv-
ing, male participants used slightly larger areas for the
content types except for social media content (S), however,
no statistically significant differences could be evaluated.
In contrast, in level 5 driving, female participants choose
larger content windows for work-related content (O) and
social media content (S). However, we did not find any sig-
nificant differences in this scenario using Mann-Whitney
U tests considering the significance level of .083.
Also the use of transparency or importance did not
show any significant differences for the proposed content
types for male and female participants in both levels of au-
tomation.
Figures 11 and 12 show the level 3 and level 5 heatmaps
for each content type, with the distinction for the gender,
i. e., male vs. female preferences.
4.7 Environment Related Differences
We further looked into differences that might arise from
driving in changing environments. Therefore, we created
a city and a highway scene. Figure 13 displays the over-
all results for level 3 and level 5 driving in the city scene
and the highway scene, respectively. While both level 5
heatmaps do not show clear distinctions (see Figures 13c
and 13d), it is evident that drivers had different WSD pref-
erences in the city and on the highway in level 3 driving.
While heatmap 13a (city scene) shows that drivers do not
prefer to occlude the direct field of view by placing content
windows in the peripheral areas, heatmap 13b (highway
scene) shows that participants prominently placed con-
tent windows on the driver’s side of the WSD.
In level 3 driving, participants utilized 3.5 content win-
dows on average (Std = 1.52) in the city environment, while
they placed 3.7 content windows (Std = 1.32) in the high-
way scene. In level 5 driving, participants averaged 4.4
windows (Std = 1.62), and female participants used 4.1
windows (Std = 1.76). In both levels of automation, the
difference is not statistically significant.
Regarding the area of content windows in level 3 driv-
ing, participants utilized similar-sized areas for all content
types in both the city and the highway scene. This is also
the case for the level 5 driving scenario.
The use of transparency did not show any significant
differences for the proposed content types in both environ-
ments in the level 3 driving scenario. However, the cho-
sen transparency was in all cases larger in the highway
scene as opposed to the city environment. Similarly to the
level 3 scenario, participants chose less transparency for
all content windows on average for the highway environ-
ment in level 5 driving. Also here the difference is not sta-
tistically significant considering the alpha-adjusted signif-
icance level of .0083. However, there is some tendency,
that participants chose less transparent windows for the
content types warnings (W, p = .039), entertainment (E,
p = .067) and social media (S, p = .057).
Furthermore, in level 5 driving, descriptive statistics
indicate, that participants perceived warnings as more im-
portant in the city than in the highway scenario. Further,
content windows were rated as generally more important
in the city than in the highways scene. However, consider-
ing the statistical evaluation, these assumptions are not
supported by the results of conducted Mann-Whitney U
tests.
Figures 14 and 15 show the level 3 and level 5 heatmaps
for each content type, with the distinction for the scenery,
i. e., city vs. highway preferences.
4.8 Qualitative Feedback
During the experiments, our experimenters were con-
stantly taking notes about the participants opinion and
verbal statements. Whenever participants would make re-
marks about drawing, placing windows or assigning con-
tent types, experimenters would use the laddering tech-
nique to extract further and more detailed information
to gain a more comprehensive insight into the use of AR
WSDs. We analyzed the qualitative data by categorizing
the experimenters’ observations of the participants’ re-
marks by looking for patterns or common themes emerg-
ing around the concept of AR WSDs and automated driv-
ing. Based on these observations, we extracted the follow-
ing key points:
4.8.1 View Management
Approximately one third of participants wanted to utilize
the same space on the WSD for multiple different con-
tents. For example, entertainment and work-related win-
dows were often grouped together, and, based on the sit-
uation, should either show entertainment content (e. g., a
movie) or work-related content (e. g., a task list, emails).
Additionally, participants also stated that a separate sec-
tion of the WSD for the front passenger would make sense
(e. g., passenger watching a movie on the passenger WSD
side, while the driver observes vehicle-related information
on his side). Therefore, a dynamic window management
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


140
|
A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
(a) Heatmap displaying warning windows (W) according to male
drivers.
(b) Heatmap displaying warning windows (W) according to female
drivers.
(c) Heatmap displaying vehicle-related windows (V) according to
male drivers.
(d) Heatmap displaying vehicle-related windows (V) according to
female drivers.
(e) Heatmap displaying work-related windows (O) according to male
drivers.
(f) Heatmap displaying work-related windows (O) according to fe-
male drivers.
(g) Heatmap displaying entertainment windows (E) according to
male drivers.
(h) Heatmap displaying entertainment windows (E) according to
female drivers.
(i) Heatmap displaying social media windows (S) according to male
drivers.
(j) Heatmap displaying social media windows (S) according to fe-
male drivers.
Figure 11: Level 3 heatmaps displaying the WSD preferences for male (left) and female (right) drivers.
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
|
141
(a) Heatmap displaying warning windows (W) according to male
drivers.
(b) Heatmap displaying warning windows (W) according to female
drivers.
(c) Heatmap displaying vehicle-related windows (V) according to
male drivers.
(d) Heatmap displaying vehicle-related windows (V) according to
female drivers.
(e) Heatmap displaying work-related windows (O) according to male
drivers.
(f) Heatmap displaying work-related windows (O) according to fe-
male drivers.
(g) Heatmap displaying entertainment windows (E) according to
male drivers.
(h) Heatmap displaying entertainment windows (E) according to
female drivers.
(i) Heatmap displaying social media windows (S) according to male
drivers.
(j) Heatmap displaying social media windows (S) according to fe-
male drivers.
Figure 12: Level 5 heatmaps displaying the WSD preferences for male (left) and female (right) drivers.
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


142
|
A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
(a) Level 3 heatmap generated from drivers’ preferences in the city
scene.
(b) Level 3 heatmap generated from drivers’ preferences in the high-
way scene.
(c) Level 5 heatmap generated from drivers’ preferences in the city
scene.
(d) Level 5 heatmap generated from drivers’ preferences in the high-
way scene.
Figure 13: Heatmaps for level 3 (top) and level 5 (bottom) automation; differentiated by city (left) vs. highway (right) environment.
is highly preferred as opposed to a static one where each
space on the WSD is assigned a content type. An exam-
ple is a large “main” window in the driver’s field of view,
surrounded by smaller “notification” windows. The con-
tent the driver focuses on would be displayed in the main
window, and as notifications (e. g., incoming email) arrive,
the driver can swap content types. Few participants men-
tioned that they would like to utilize the side window in
addition to the windshield for customizable content. An-
other interesting aspect is comfort. Participants strongly
preferred to place content on the driver side, in order not
having to rotate or tilt the head to see the content. Addi-
tionally, for the level 3 scenario, participants stated that
content displayed on the passenger side would be too dis-
tracting. Furthermore, windows utilized in portrait mode
were strongly associated with lists, such as song, email, or
to-do lists. Detailed content, however, such as a concrete
email, should be visualized in landscape mode.
4.8.2 Interaction Management
We also asked participants wondered, how they could
imagine to interact with the WSD. The most common an-
swer was gestural interaction. For example, one could
perform a swipe gesture to change window contents or
dismiss notifications appearing on the WSD. Another an-
swer was interaction using voice commands. Since gain-
ing more and more popularity in home automation sys-
tems, natural language processors could be a potential in-
teraction concept in highly automated vehicles. Further
answers included already existing hardware interfaces,
such as rotary knobs and buttons/switches on the steering
wheel.
4.8.3 Trust in Automated Driving
We recognized that most participants, being informed that
they cannot take over the vehicle in level 5 driving, still
placed warning windows on the WSD. When asked about
this oddity, the vast majority of them stated that they
wanted to know “what the system thinks”, “be kept up to
date with the driving situation”, and therefore being able
to prepare should a dangerous circumstance arise. This is
consistent with state of the art in trust research on highly
automated vehicles [35]. Those who did not place warning
windows, stated that they would only drive in a fully auto-
mated vehicle if it is completely safe and they can trust it
completely, thereby rendering warnings needless.
4.8.4 Privacy
An obvious issue that arises with large displays is privacy
[11, 29]. Many participants stated that they would not want
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
|
143
(a) Heatmap displaying warning windows (W) in the city scene.
(b) Heatmap displaying warning windows (W) in the highway scene.
(c) Heatmap displaying vehicle-related windows (V) in the city
scene.
(d) Heatmap displaying vehicle-related windows (V) in the highway
scene.
(e) Heatmap displaying work-related windows (O) in the city scene.
(f) Heatmap displaying work-related windows (O) in the highway
scene.
(g) Heatmap displaying entertainment windows (E) in the city scene.
(h) Heatmap displaying entertainment windows (E) in the highway
scene.
(i) Heatmap displaying social media windows (S) in the city scene.
(j) Heatmap displaying social media windows (S) in the highway
scene.
Figure 14: Level 3 heatmaps displaying the WSD preferences for the city (left) and highway (right) scene.
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


144
|
A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
(a) Heatmap displaying warning windows (W) in the city scene.
(b) Heatmap displaying warning windows (W) in the highway scene.
(c) Heatmap displaying vehicle-related windows (V) in the city
scene.
(d) Heatmap displaying vehicle-related windows (V) in the highway
scene.
(e) Heatmap displaying work-related windows (O) in the city scene.
(f) Heatmap displaying work-related windows (O) in the highway
scene.
(g) Heatmap displaying entertainment windows (E) in the city scene.
(h) Heatmap displaying entertainment windows (E) in the highway
scene.
(i) Heatmap displaying social media windows (S) in the city scene.
(j) Heatmap displaying social media windows (S) in the highway
scene.
Figure 15: Level 5 heatmaps displaying the WSD preferences for the city (left) and highway (right) scene.
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
|
145
to share sensitive and/or personal information with other
vehicle passengers. While participants noted that for some
content types privacy may not be an issue (e. g., watching
a movie), work-related or social media content would be
preferred to “invisible” to other passengers.
4.8.5 Context Awareness
It was further noted by some participants, when asked why
they placed non-warning windows in the driver’s field of
view in level 3 driving, that they expect all windows to
disappear when a dangerous situation occurs that would
require the attention of the driver, and a large warning
window should pop up notifying the driver what to do.
Additionally, some participants stressed that on a work
day, they would like to have work-related content on the
WSD, while on weekends, entertainment and social media
content are favored. For daily commutes, few participants
added that they would like to see entertainment content,
especially, when stuck in a traffic jam. Context aware sys-
tems could include users’ daily routines and adapt WSD
contents according to their preferences.
4.9 Survey Responses
In a post questionnaire we asked the participants gen-
eral questions relevant for the use of AR-WSDs in vehi-
cles. Participants had to rate their agreement on a 7-point
Likert scale (7 = fully agree, 4 = neutral, 1 = fully dis-
agree, see Figure 16). The results reveal some interesting
insights. The majority of our experiments were students
and staff of a technical university, a circumstance which
is reflected in the answers. The majority considers them-
selves as tech-savvy (Mdn = 6). They stated that they
would use automated vehicle technology extensively if
available (Mdn = 5), what indicates a relatively high accep-
tance among study participants (compared to other sur-
veys, such as [13] or [27]). Only few can imagine to wear AR
glasses while driving (Mdn = 3) to get additional informa-
tion overlays, suggesting that complex AR concepts cannot
be implemented until sophisticated WSDs are available.
An interesting economical possibility may emerge for mo-
bility/transport providers [3]. Few respondents (Mdn = 2)
stated to allow advertisements on WSDs if this would re-
duce or even omit the costs of individual mobility. How-
ever, the younger participants were strongly in favor of dis-
playing ads for the benefit of cheaper mobility (Mdn = 5).
Additionally, many participants (Mdn = 5) can imagine a
WSD to become the only display in a vehicle. To our sur-
prise, elderly participants were more likely to accept WSDs
as only in-vehicle display (Mdn = 6), while younger drivers
stated they would still have demand for center consoles or
other display locations (Mdn = 4).
5 Discussion
Considering the individual research questions, WSDs are
an interesting concept in combination with automated ve-
hicles. Our results show that potential users might use
them extensively (RQ1). Drivers prefer WSDs to display
data from various information sources, and thereby con-
sider the safety-related limitations of different levels of
automation. In conditional automation (level 3), it is im-
portant for most drivers to be able to see what is in front
of the vehicle, and thus they did not utilize content in
their direct line of sight. Furthermore, drivers emphasized
vehicle-related data such as warnings or dashboards, and
rated them as very important. In fully automated driving
Figure 16: Likert plots showing the results of the survey questions conducted after the experiment. The medians are highlighted in green.
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


146
|
A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
however, they shifted their preference more to non-driving
related tasks and used much larger areas for entertain-
ment, work or social media related applications (RQ2).
Although users nowadays are familiar with portrait for-
mats (such as used by many smartphone applications),
most windows were characterized with a landscape format
(RQ3). Regarding RQ4, there is some general agreement
on the locations of vehicle-related information or warn-
ings, that could partly emerge from their existing driv-
ing experiences (i. e., vehicle dashboards located directly
above the steering wheel). Additionally, the center per-
spective was commonly used in fully automated driving
to engage in non-vehicle related activities, such as media
consumption or work activities. Answering RQ5, drivers
wanted warning windows to be the least transparent in
both automation scenarios. In level 5, however, content as-
sociated with work, entertainment and social media was
drawn with less transparency than in level 3, in order to
focus more on these tasks as opposed to the outside envi-
ronment. In both conditional and full automation, warn-
ings and vehicle-related dashboards were perceived as the
most important content types. In full automation, how-
ever, work-, entertainment- and social media-related con-
tent gain (relative) importance (RQ6). When grouping our
participants by age and gender, we also found interest-
ing differences. Male participants strongly favored con-
tent in the driver’s field of view in conditional vehicle
automation, and they used more windows, while female
drivers preferred to observe the outside environment and
therefore placed content windows in the peripheral ar-
eas of the WSD. In full automation, both male and fe-
male drivers utilized the entire WSD. Generally, women
used less transparency for their content windows (RQ7).
When considering age, elderly drivers tend to place fewer
content windows on the WSD, and made them smaller
and more opaque than their young counterparts (RQ8).
The driving environment, which we separated into urban
(city) and highway, also had some influence on partici-
pants’ WSD preferences. Especially work-related content
windows were more commonly utilized in the city scene.
Additionally, drivers generally preferred less transparent
windows in the city scene (RQ9).
6 Conclusion
In this work we have evaluated user preferences for wind-
shield displays by allowing participants of a lab study (N =
63) to freely choose position, size, transparency and im-
portance of different content windows. We have further in-
vestigated the impact of different levels of automation (L3:
conditional automation, and L5: full automation). Our re-
sults indicate the most important and most prominently
used areas of windshield displays as desired by potential
users, as well as the use of different content types (such as
vehicle-related information, warnings, or entertainment)
with respect to the level of automation. Drivers seem to be
well aware of the implications of different autonomy lev-
els and vehicle capabilities. For example, in level 3 driv-
ing, where drivers need to quickly assume vehicle con-
trol in case of take-over situations, warnings or vehicle-
related information received higher importance and were
used most often, while content relevant for non-driving re-
lated tasks was placed in comparably small windows in
more peripheral areas of the WSD, thereby avoiding oc-
clusion of the outside environment. In contrast, in fully
automated driving, entertainment, work-related, or social
media content received more importance and commonly
span over large areas of the windshield display. Addition-
ally, we highlighted differences in user preferences accord-
ing to age, gender and the environment. Our results show
that designers should take our findings regarding the use
of different content types and their position, size, trans-
parency and priority on the WSD into consideration when
designing WSD applications.
6.1 Limitations
We are aware that our setting has some limitations. First,
it was designed as lab experiment in a static environment.
Preferences might slightly differ if a real driving scene
would show participants that some areas used for display-
ing information could occlude important parts of the sur-
rounding environment (and not only the center perspec-
tive, i. e., pedestrians entering a crosswalk from the left,
passing cyclists from the right at a crossing). While the
static user study setup appears technically simple, it pro-
vides us with essential and initial information about the
basic usage of windshield displays for a multitude of dif-
ferent drivers. Further, we did not include any kind of view
or interaction management – if users could switch applica-
tions, the chance could increase that similar content types
(such as videos, office, or web applications) are displayed
within the same window.
Another limitation that needs to be addressed is the
extent at which WSDs would be used in a real-world sce-
nario. Many people have smartphones and wearables such
as smartwatches. When they are presented with auto-
mated vehicles and WSDs, how likely will they transition
content, and what specific content, from their personal
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
|
147
devices to either private shielded or semi-public WSDs?
While we specifically told participants to imagine being
alone in the vehicle, with no other passengers, the issue of
shared vehicles (e. g., public transport) was not addressed
in this research.
6.2 Future Work
In future studies we also want to investigate the shape of
content windows. Although TVs, smartphones and com-
puter monitors usually display their content in a rectangu-
lar shape, WSDs could differ. [5].
Large displays, especially when used in a public con-
text, would also raise some privacy concerns, both in-
vehicle and outside [1], that should be addressed in the fu-
ture. We further want to use the collected heatmap data,
i. e., the core content area to show concrete information
such as media playlists or a video conference in order to al-
low the drivers to interact with the WSD application, and
investigate the visual complexity of WSD applications in
general, regarding multiple factors (such as layout, color
coding, typography, etc. – similarly as Riegler et al. did in
the mobile domain [21], [22]), including eye trackers. An-
other important aspect for investigation is, if changing en-
vironments and scene complexity (i. e., traffic jams, com-
muting) as well as the travel purpose (i. e., business vs
leisure trip) would have an impact on user preferences. Fi-
nally, we want to conduct a driving simulator study to find
out how participants react to content presented on WSDs
during (simulated) drives. For such a dynamic scenario, we
will use the gathered data from this study as default values
and we will further investigate how drivers would or would
not alter them in these varying context situations.
Funding: The research presented is conducted within
the project LEEFF (Low Emission Electric Freight Fleets)
funded by the Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG)
under contract number 853768 as well as the FH-Impuls
program of the German Federal Ministry of Education and
Research (BMBF) under Grant No. 13FH7I01IA (SAFIR).
References
[1]
Ashley Colley, Jonna Häkkilä, Meri-Tuulia Forsman, Bastian
Pfleging, and Florian Alt. 2018. Car Exterior Surface Displays.
In the 7th ACM International Symposium. ACM Press, New York,
New York, USA, 1–8.
[2]
SAE On-Road Automated Vehicle Standards Committee. 2014.
Taxonomy and definitions for terms related to on-road motor
vehicle automated driving systems. (2014).
[3]
Peter Fröhlich and Jürgen Rehak. 2014. Context-aware in-car
advertising. In the 6th International Conference. ACM Press,
New York, New York, USA, 1–6.
[4]
Joseph L Gabbard, Gregory M Fitch, and Hyungil Kim. 2014.
Behind the Glass: Driver Challenges and Opportunities for AR
Automotive Applications. Proc. IEEE 102, 2, 124–136.
[5]
Renate Haeuslschmid, Susanne Forster, Katharina Vierheilig,
Daniel Buschek, and Andreas Butz. 2017. Recognition of Text
and Shapes on a Large-Sized Head-Up Display. In the 2017
Conference. ACM Press, New York, New York, USA, 821–831.
[6]
Renate Haeuslschmid, Bastian Pfleging, and Florian
Alt. 2016a. A Design Space to Support the Development
of Windshield Applications for the Car. In the 2016 CHI
Conference. ACM Press, New York, New York, USA, 5076–5091.
[7]
Renate Haeuslschmid, Yixin Shou, John O’Donovan, Gary
Burnett, and Andreas Butz. 2016b. First Steps towards a View
Management Concept for Large-sized Head-up Displays with
Continuous Depth. In the 8th International Conference. ACM
Press, New York, New York, USA, 1–8.
[8]
Corey D Harper, Chris T Hendrickson, Sonia Mangones, and
Constantine Samaras. 2016. Estimating potential increases
in travel with autonomous vehicles for the non-driving,
elderly and people with travel-restrictive medical conditions.
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 72
1–9.
[9]
Renate Häuslschmid, Sven Osterwald, Marcus Lang, and
Andreas Butz. 2015. Augmenting the Driver’s View with
Peripheral Information on a Windshield Display. ACM, New
York, New York, USA.
[10] Chunjia Hu, Guangtao Zhai, and Duo Li. 2015. An
Augmented-Reality night vision enhancement application for
see-through glasses. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on
Multimedia & Expo Workshops (ICMEW). IEEE, 1–6.
[11]
Shahram Izadi, Harry Brignull, Tom Rodden, Yvonne Rogers,
and Mia Underwood. 2003. Dynamo: A Public Interactive
Surface Supporting the Cooperative Sharing and Exchange
of Media. In Proceedings of the 16th Annual ACM Symposium
on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’03). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 159–168.
[12] Andrew L. Kun, Manfred Tscheligi, Andreas Riener, and Hidde
van der Meulen. 2017. ARV 2017: Workshop on Augmented
Reality for Intelligent Vehicles. In Proceedings of the 9th
International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and
Interactive Vehicular Applications Adjunct (AutomotiveUI ’17).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 47–51.
[13] M Kyriakidis, R Happee, and J C F de Winter. July 2015. Public
opinion on automated driving: Results of an international
questionnaire among 5000 respondents. Transportation
Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour 32,
127–140.
[14] Seungjae Lee, Changwon Jang, Seokil Moon, Byounghyo Lee,
Jaebum Cho, and Byoungho Lee. 2016. See-through light field
displays for augmented reality. In SIGGRAPH ASIA 2016 Virtual
Reality meets Physical Reality: Modelling and Simulating
Virtual Humans and Environments. ACM Press, New York, New
York, USA, 1–2.
[15]
Hao Li and Fawzi Nashashibi. 2011. Multi-vehicle cooperative
perception and augmented reality for driver assistance:
A possibility to ’see’ through front vehicle. In 2011 14th
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


148
|
A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems - (ITSC 2011). IEEE, 242–247.
[16] Lutz Lorenz, Philipp Kerschbaum, and Josef Schumann. Oct.
2014. Designing take over scenarios for automated driving.
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
Annual Meeting 58, 1, 1681–1685.
[17]
Detlev Mohr, Hans-Werner Kaas, Paul Gao, Andreas Zielke,
Andreas Tschiesner, Dominik Wee, and Matthias Kässer. 2015.
Competing for the connected customer – perspectives on the
opportunities created by car connectivity and automation.
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/industries/
automotive%20and%20assembly/our%20insights/
how%20carmakers%20can%20compete%20for%20the%
20connected%20consumer/competing_for_the_connected_
customer.ashx. Accessed: 2019-01-07.
[18] Byoung-Jun Park, Jeong-Woo Lee, Changrak Yoon, and Kyong
Ho Kim. 2015. Augmented reality and representation in vehicle
for safe driving at night. In 2015 International Conference on
Information and Communication Technology Convergence
(ICTC). IEEE, 1261–1263.
[19] Bastian Pfleging, Maurice Rang, and Nora Broy. 2016.
Investigating user needs for non-driving-related activities
during automated driving. In Proceedings of the 15th
international conference on mobile and ubiquitous
multimedia. ACM, 91–99.
[20] Ronald A Rensink, J Kevin O’Regan, and James J Clark. May
2016. To See or not to See: The Need for Attention to Perceive
Changes in Scenes. Psychological Science 8, 5, 368–373.
[21] Andreas Riegler and Clemens Holzmann. 2015. UI-CAT:
Calculating User Interface Complexity Metrics for Mobile
Applications. In Proceedings of the 14th International
Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 390–394.
[22] Andreas Riegler and Clemens Holzmann. 2018. Measuring
Visual User Interface Complexity of Mobile Applications With
Metrics. Interacting with Computers.
[23] Andreas Riener. 2012. Gestural Interaction in Vehicular
Applications. Computer 45, 4, 42–47.
[24] Andreas Riener, Susanne Boll, and Andrew L. Kun. 2016.
Automotive User Interfaces in the Age of Automation (Dagstuhl
Seminar 16262). Dagstuhl Reports 6, 6 111–159.
[25] Andreas Riener and Alois Ferscha. 2013. Enhancing future
mass ICT with social capabilities. In Co-evolution of intelligent
socio-technical systems. Springer, 141–184.
[26] Andreas Riener, Andrew L Kun, Joe Gabbard, Stephen
Brewster, and Andreas Riegler. 2018. ARV 2018. In the 10th
International Conference. ACM Press, New York, New York,
USA, 30–36.
[27] Christina Rödel, Susanne Stadler, Alexander
Meschtscherjakov, and Manfred Tscheligi. 2014. Towards
Autonomous Cars. In the 6th International Conference. ACM
Press, New York, New York, USA, 1–8.
[28] Clemens Schartmüller, Andreas Riener, Philipp Wintersberger,
and Anna-Katharina Frison. 2018. Workaholistic :
On Balancing Typing- and Handover-Performance in
Automated Driving. In 20th International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and
Services, MobileHCI 2018. ACM Press, Barcelona, Spain. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3229434.3229459.
[29] Garth B. D. Shoemaker and Kori M. Inkpen. 2001. Single
Display Privacyware: Augmenting Public Displays with Private
Information. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’01). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 522–529.
[30] Missie Smith, Jillian Streeter, Gary Burnett, and Joseph L
Gabbard. 2015. Visual search tasks. In the 7th International
Conference. ACM Press, New York, New York, USA, 80–87.
[31] Desney S Tan and Mary Czerwinski. 2003. Effects of visual
separation and physical discontinuities when distributing
information across multiple displays. In Proc. Interact, Vol. 3.
252–255.
[32] K Tangmanee and S Teeravarunyou. 2012. Effects of guided
arrows on head-up display towards the vehicle windshield.
In 2012 Southeast Asian Network of Ergonomics Societies
Conference (SEANES). IEEE, 1–6.
[33] Bart van Arem, Cornelie J G van Driel, and Ruben Visser.
2006. The Impact of Cooperative Adaptive Cruise Control on
Traffic-Flow Characteristics. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems 7, 4, 429–436.
[34] Philipp Wintersberger, Andreas Riener, Clemens Schartmüller,
Anna-Katharina Frison, and Clemens Weigl. 2018. Let Me Finish
before I Take Over: Towards Attention Aware Device Integration
in Highly Automated Vehicles. In Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and
Interactive Vehicular Applications. ACM, 51–58.
[35] Philipp Wintersberger, Tamara von Sawitzky, Anna-Katharina
Frison, and Andreas Riener. 2017. Traffic Augmentation as a
Means to Increase Trust in Automated Driving Systems. In the
12th Biannual Conference. ACM Press, New York, New York,
USA, 1–7.
Bionotes
Research Associate and PhD
Candidate Andreas Riegler
University of Applied Sciences Upper
Austria, Department of Energy and Mobility,
Hagenberg, Austria
andreas.riegler@fh-hagenberg.at
Andreas Riegler is a researcher at the research group Mobile Inter-
active Systems of the University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria.
His research interests include Automotive Computing, Mobile Com-
puting and Human-Computer Interaction. He is currently investigat-
ing the use of Augmented and Virtual Reality for Intelligent Vehicles.
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


A. Riegler et al., Augmented Reality Windshield Displays
|
149
Research Associate and PhD
Candidate Philipp Wintersberger
Technische Hochschule Ingolstadt,
Ingolstadt, Germany
philipp.wintersberger@carissma.eu
Philipp Wintersberger is a researcher at the research center
CARISSMA/THI and obtained his diploma in Computer Science from
Johannes Kepler University Linz specializing in Human-Computer-
Interaction and Computer Vision. He worked 10 years as a software
engineer/architect and was invited speaker about mobile comput-
ing and software development at several conferences/events. In
January 2016, he joined the Human-Computer Interaction Group at
CARISSMA/THI to conduct research in the area of Human Factors
and Driving Ergonomics.
Prof. for Human-Machine Interface and
Virtual Reality Andreas Riener
Technische Hochschule Ingolstadt,
Ingolstadt, Germany
andreas.riener@thi.de
Andreas Riener is a professor for Human-Machine Interaction and
Virtual Reality at Technische Hochschule Ingolstadt (THI), Germany
with co-appointment at CARISSMA (Center of Automotive Research
on Integrated Safety Systems and Measurement Area). He is further
leading the human-computer interaction group (HCIG) at THI. His re-
search interests include driving ergonomics, driver state estimation
from physiological measures, human factors in driver-vehicle inter-
faces as well as topics related to (over)trust, acceptance, and ethical
issues in automated driving.
Prof. for Interactive
Technologies Clemens Holzmann
University of Applied Sciences Upper
Austria, Department of Energy and Mobility,
Hagenberg, Austria
clemens.holzmann@fh-ooe.at
Clemens Holzmann is a full professor at the School of Informatics,
Communications and Media of the University of Applied Sciences
Upper Austria. Since 2018, he is also vice president for IT of the
University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria. His research interests
include Mobile Computing and Human-Computer Interaction. For
more information about R&D projects and publications, please visit
the website of his research group Mobile Interactive Systems (https:
//mint.fh-hagenberg.at/).
Unauthenticated
Download Date | 9/19/19 8:35 AM


