238
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and 
Interactive Vehicular Applications (AutomotiveUI ‚13), October 28–30, 2013,  Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
Towards Augmented Reality Navigation  
Using Affordable Technology
Oskar Palinko, Andrew L. Kun,  
Zachary Cook, Adam Downey, Aaron Lecomte, Meredith Swanson, Tina Tomaszewski 
University of New Hampshire 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Kingsbury Hall, Durham, NH 03824, USA 
{firstname.lastname}@unh.edu 
ABSTRACT
Augmented reality (AR) navigation systems are likely to improve 
the driving experience compared to today’s personal navigation 
devices on the dashboard, as they don’t require glances away from 
the road ahead. As technology is not yet capable to deliver an 
affordable and seamless HUD AR solution, we explore an 
inexpensive version of augmentation, which would have a similar 
benefit of reduced distraction. We propose using an LED (light 
emitting diode) matrix in the periphery of the driver’s vision to 
indicate turns on the road. We find that such a system produces 
better results in visual attention, driving performance and in 
subjective measures compared to standard navigation devices. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.5.2 [Information Interf. And Presentation]: User Interfaces.
General Terms
Algorithms, Measurement, Experimentation, Human Factors. 
Keywords
Driving Simulator, Navigation Aids, Driving Performance. 
1. INTRODUCTION
Unless cars drive themselves, there will be a continued need for 
in-car personal navigation devices (PNDs) in the future. Most of 
today’s commercially available solutions display a map on a 
screen either in the dashboard of the vehicle or on top of it. The 
problem is that these systems introduce visual distraction: the 
drivers have to point their gaze towards the screen to acquire 
navigation information. In order to reduce glances away from the 
road, it would be beneficial to have the navigation cues integrated 
in the observed world using augmented reality (AR). However, 
such head-up display (HUD) AR is not yet affordable for a 
commercial in-vehicle navigation product. Therefore, in this study 
we explore a simple system that could provide a low-cost 
navigational aid, which mimics AR. This system is a matrix of 
LEDs on top of the windshield that provides turn-by-turn 
directions. We will explore this system by comparing it to a 
standard PND (SPND), which uses a head-down display to 
present directions on a 2D map of the world. We propose three 
hypotheses: 
(H1) The LED navigation system will allow drivers to spend more 
time looking at the outside world than the SPND. 
(H2) The LED navigation system will allow better driving 
performance than the standard PND. 
(H3) Users will prefer the LED navigation system over the SPND. 
2. BACKGROUND 
Augmented reality HUD navigation devices show a navigation 
route directly on the windshield of the vehicle. These devices hold 
the promise of a less distracting driving environment. Steinfeld et 
al. [8] showed that AR HUD in-car displays shorten the reaction 
time to sudden events which is crucial in avoiding accidents. In a 
driving simulator experiment Liu [6] confirmed that drivers react 
faster to accidental events when using HUD, both for a higher and 
lower level of workload. Horrey et al. [3] compared HUD systems 
to using head-down displays (HDD). They found that HDD 
decreased driving performance, i.e. drivers reacted slower to 
unexpected events compared to HUDs. They concluded that the 
lack of focal vision on the road ahead is responsible for slower 
reactions. Medenica et al. [7] compared a simulated AR 
navigation device to a HDD Google StreetView-like navigation 
device and a standard map-based HDD. They found that HDD 
caused the drivers to divert their gazes from the road ahead 
significantly more than for HUD. Cross-correlation analysis 
showed that the increased number of glances away from the road 
when using HDD caused deterioration in driving performance.  
What can be said about different implementations of AR for in-
vehicle services? Kim and Dey [4] presented a simulated HUD 
AR system which could benefit the elderly. In their solution both 
the immediate directions and a section of the upcoming road map 
was displayed on the windshield. They reported a reduction in 
navigation errors compared to a head-down map-based navigation 
system. Tangmanee and Teeravarunyou [9] explored how the 
position and shape of graphical elements of a HUD AR system 
influence driver attention. Subjects in a simulator-based 
experiment paid more attention to guiding arrows located close to 
the middle of the screen than ones further to the side.  
While the above results are encouraging for HUD AR, this 
technology is not yet available in cars. Instead, elements of AR 
navigation are available. In a road study Fröhlich et al. [1] 
investigated the presentation of real-time telematics services using 
three modalities, including HDD AR. Results indicated that 
participants valued the AR visual display. Commercially a HDD 
AR solution for smartphones is the Wikitude Drive app [12], 
which overlays a simulated navigation route on the image 
acquired from the phone’s camera. This technology, displayed on 
a dashboard-mounted screen still suffers from the need to divert 
one’s gaze away from the road. Another, less sophisticated 
solution for guiding drivers are so-called light-bar guidance 
systems used in agricultural vehicles such as tractors, e.g. 
GreenStar Lightbar by John Deere [2]. This is essentially a row of 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  
AutomotiveUI '13, October 28 - 30 2013, Eindhoven, Netherlands 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM. ACM 978-1-4503-2478-6/13/10…$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2516540.2516569  


239
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and 
Interactive Vehicular Applications (AutomotiveUI ‚13), October 28–30, 2013,  Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
LED lights directing the operator of the vehicle in such a way that 
ensures full coverage of an agricultural field, row by row. Our 
solution presented below is similar to these low-tech AR devices, 
but instead of a row of lights we present a matrix of LEDs. The 
space between these lights is transparent, i.e. the world is visible 
through the matrix. 
3. EXPERIMENT 
Subjects drove in our driving simulator in a city scenario while 
receiving driving directions from two different navigation aids. 
Our experiment used the same equipment, and very similar 
methods, as our prior experiments described in [5] and [7]. 
3.1 Equipment 
The experiment was performed in a high-fidelity driving simulator 
with a 180° field of view screen and a full-width automobile cab. 
The cab sits on top of a motion base which simulates car 
movements for braking and accelerating as well as bumps on the 
road. As shown in Figure 1, the simulator was equipped with an 
eye-tracker which tracks subjects’ gaze and head position using a 
pair of cameras mounted on the dashboard. Figure 1 also shows 
the location of the in-car LCD screen which was used as the 
display for the standard PND, and the LED matrix used as the AR 
device.  
3.2 Method 
3.2.1 Participants 
Fifteen university students participated in the experiment. We 
excluded data for five of them, because they either could not 
finish the experiment due to feeling simulator sickness or they 
could not master operating the driving simulator. The ten 
remaining participants were between 18 and 22 years of age 
(mean age 20.1 years, standard deviation 1.37 years). As 
compensation, each received a $20 gift card to an online store. 
3.2.2 Navigation Aids 
Each participant performed navigation with both of the following 
personal navigation devices: 
1.
LED Augmented Reality PND (LED PND). The LEDs 
were mounted in 8 rows and 7 columns on a  sheet of transparent 
plastic approximately 28cm x 15cm in size, see Figure 1. They 
were remotely controlled by an experimenter seated behind the 
simulator, see Figure 2. The experimenter initiated turn signaling 
based on the location of the participant’s car in the simulated 
world which was displayed on the experimenter’s LCD screen. 
When the subjects needed to turn left, first the four left LED 
columns lit up and started blinking. After 3 seconds, the blinking 
turned into the four leftmost columns lighting up one after the 
other creating an apparent leftward animation (see video [10]). 
Similar cues were given for turning right, with the difference that 
the four rightmost columns participated in a rightward animation. 
When the drivers needed to continue driving straight (which was 
the default mode), the three middle columns of LEDs were on.   
2.
Standard PND (SPND). Similar to the most basic PNDs, 
our LCD screen (Figure 1) presented users with a real-time map 
of the surrounding environment as well as the position of the 
vehicle in a simulated world. The 2D map was presented in a 
dynamic, exocentric, forward-up view. The car (represented by a 
small triangle on the map) always remained in the center of the 
screen, while the road moved about it (see video [11]). The 
diameter of the screen was 7 inches (18cm) and the size of the 
screen was 15cm x 9cm. The LCD screen was placed to the right 
of the steering wheel, which is a common place for contemporary 
built-in PNDs and smart phones with navigation capabilities. 
While driving with the SPND, the LED matrix was removed from 
the simulator. 
We didn’t use spoken directions in this experiment with either 
navigation device. We did so to explore purely the visual 
component of the two systems. 
3.2.3 Procedure 
After filling out the consent form and personal information 
questionnaire, participants proceeded to driving the simulator in a 
city environment. They completed two experimental runs, one for 
each PND. They trained using these systems for 5 minutes before 
each run, on roads similar to the experimental ones. To prevent 
ordering effects, we counterbalanced the presentation order of the 
PNDs between subjects. Participants drove on two-lane city 
streets. The second route traveled was the same as the first, but in 
reverse direction. Each route also included two unexpected events. 
After each PND the participants filled out a NASA-TLX 
questionnaire. At the end of the experiment they also ranked their 
agreement with statements pertaining to their experience with the 
two navigation devices using the Likert-scale, and provided 
written and/or verbal comments. 
3.2.4 Design 
The independent variable in our within-subjects factorial design 
was the PND type, Nav.
We measured multiple dependent variables: 
x Percent Dwell Time (PDT) on four areas of interest: the outside 
world, the LED display, the LCD display and other. Using the 
eye tracker on the dashboard we calculated the time drivers 
spent looking at these four areas. In the simulator environment 
we defined looking at the outside world as looking at one of the 
three projection screens (front, left, right). A low value of PDT 
on the outside world indicates that the driver is distracted, 
Figure 1. Locations of devices in the simulator cab. 
Figure 2. Driving with LED (left) and  
controlling the display (right). 
LED display 


240
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and 
Interactive Vehicular Applications (AutomotiveUI ‚13), October 28–30, 2013,  Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
which in turn can lead to collisions. In calculating the PDT on 
LCD we classified gazes at the area of 35cm x 25cm 
approximately centered on the LCD display as gazes towards 
the LCD display. Similarly we classified gazes at the 28cm x 
17cm area approximately centered on the LED display as gazes 
towards the LED display. We made both of these areas larger 
than the corresponding LCD and LED objects. Thus, gazes that 
are close to the objects are classified as gazes at the objects. 
x Steering wheel angle variance (SWV), which measures how 
much the angle of the steering wheel changes over time. Higher 
values indicate worse driving.  
x Lane position variance (LPV), which measures how much the 
drivers swerve in their lane. As for SWV, higher values 
indicate worse driving.  
x Subjective measures (NASA-TLX score, and level of agreement 
with preferential statements).
3.2.5 Calculation 
The city routes in our experiment can be broken up into segments 
by treating roads between two intersections as separate segments. 
We calculated the results using data from 13 short segments, each 
200 meters long. As discussed in [5] and [7], these segments 
required similar driving and participants did not encounter 
unexpected events in any of them.  
In analyzing these segments, we excluded data collected over the 
first 60 meters and the final 40 meters of a segment, and analyzed 
data generated over (200–60–40) = 100 meters. This was done 
because driving performance is different between the excluded 
and analyzed portions of the segments. For example, at the 
beginning of a segment, drivers are completing the turning 
maneuver that is necessary to get through the previous 
intersection. And at the end of a segment, they are decelerating 
before entering the next intersection. Thus, the resulting variances 
can be much larger than those encountered away from 
intersections, which makes it difficult to compare excluded and 
analyzed portions of segments. 
We calculated all three observed dependent variables (PDT, SWV 
and LPV) separately for each of the 10 subjects in each of the 13 
segments. Then we averaged all 13 segments for each subject to 
end up with 10 averages of each PDT, SWV and LPV on which 
we performed statistical analysis. 
For each participant, we rejected segment values which were more 
than 3 standard deviations away from the average of the values of 
all segments for that participant. We rejected the 2 segments for 
the SWV data, 1 for the LPV data, and none for the PDT data.  
4. RESULTS 
4.1 Visual Attention 
We calculated the percent dwell time (PDT) of the driver’s gaze
on four areas of interest as shown in Table 1. It can be observed 
that the subjects did not look at the LED matrix any significant 
amount of time (≤0.49% in either condition). They did look at the 
LCD display (10.12%) while they were using it for navigation in 
the SPND condition. The ‘other’ column includes gazes at the 
speedometer, steering wheel, rear view mirror, etc.  
We conducted a repeated measures ANOVA to assess the effect 
of the two PNDs on visual attention using PDT on the outside 
world as the dependent variable. The analysis revealed a 
significant main effect on PDT for Nav (F(1,9)=16.35, p = 0.003). 
The average PDT for LED PND was 94.38%, while it was 
86.27% for SPND, see Figure 3. 
4.2 Driving Performance 
We also applied repeated measures ANOVA on driving 
performance measures. We found a significant difference for 
SWV (Figure 4) between LED and SPND (F(1,9)=5.17, p=0.049). 
The difference between these two devices was marginally 
significant for LPV (F(1,9)=4.98, p=0.052), see Figure 5. 
4.3 Subjective measures 
The NASA-TLX workload assessment tool did not yield any 
significant results. The Likert-scale questionnaire at the end of the 
experiment informed us that 7 of 10 participants preferred the 
LED compared to the SPND. Six of 10 agreed that they needed to 
use only their peripheral vision to acquire information from the 
LED display. 
Nine of 10 participants provided either written or verbal feedback 
that indicated a preference for the LED display over the SPND. 
Table 1. Percent dwell time on different areas. 
outside 
world 
LED 
matrix 
LCD (SPND) 
display 
other 
LED 
94.38 % 
0.49 % 
0.01 % 
5.12 % 
SPND 
86.27 % 
0.02 % 
10.12 % 
3.59 % 
Figure 3. Average percent dwell time on outside world.
Figure 5. Average lane position variance. 
Figure 4. Average steering wheel angle variance. 
60
70
80
90
100
LED PND
SPND
average PDT [%]
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
LED PND
SPND
average LPV [m2]
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
LED PND
SPND
average SWV 
[degree2]
Error bars: ±1 SD 
Error bars: ±1 SD 
Error bars: ±1 SD 


241
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and 
Interactive Vehicular Applications (AutomotiveUI ‚13), October 28–30, 2013,  Eindhoven, The Netherlands.
Quote 1 (Q1) of a written comment by participant 1 (P1) shows 
that he found the LED display easy to use and did not need to 
glance at it. 
Q1 (P1): The LEDs were a lot easier to follow since I didn’t have 
to go out of my way to look at it.”
P7 agreed with P1 that the LED display was easier to use, and 
further added that he would personally consider purchasing 
something like this if it were closely priced to a commercially 
available PND. 
Q2 (P2): “I saw improvement in reaction times when using an 
LED display. It was significantly easier to use and I would 
consider using it myself if it was similarly priced.”
Some of the participants also pointed out aspects they disliked 
about the LED display and made suggestions for improvement. 
Q3 is from P5, and shows that he liked the LED display but would 
still like to have the feel of a standard PND. P12 was excluded 
from the study due to poor driving skills. However, we include 
this participant’s comment as it was the most negative comment, 
and points out that there is more work to be done to improve the 
system.  
Q3 (P5): “I suggest adding the LED in addition to a standard GPS 
display. 
Q4 (P12): “Too high up, too bright, no indication of future turns. 
Flashing distracting.”
5. DISCUSSION 
We started this study by proposing three hypotheses. We will now 
consider these hypotheses in light of our results. 
(H1) The LED navigation system will allow drivers to spend more 
time looking at the outside world than the SPND. 
The average percent dwell time (PDT) on the road ahead was 
higher for the LED PND (94.38%) than for the SPND (86.27%). 
Clearly, the LED PND allowed users to look at the road ahead 
more instead of being distracted by the SPND. While using the 
SPND, the drivers spent a considerable amount of time looking at 
the LCD device displaying the map (10.12%), which might pose a 
safety hazard because their gazes were not scanning the road 
ahead. We also found that the LED matrix did not draw any 
significant amount of visual attention (0.49%) which indicates 
that drivers used their peripheral vision to detect directions from 
the LED PND. These PDT values are consistent with the ones we 
obtained in two previous studies [5, 7].  
(H2) The LED navigation system will allow better driving 
performance than the standard PND. 
Variance of steering wheel angle was significantly lower for the 
LED PND than for the SPND. A lower variance indicates better 
driving performance. This improvement can be attributed to the 
fact that drivers spent more time observing the road ahead while 
using the LED PND, because they did not need to divert their 
gaze to a map as in the SPND condition. Lane position variance 
was also lower for the LED display; however this difference was 
only marginally significant. In fact the p-value of both 
performance measures was close to .05, indicating that it would be 
useful to include more participants in the study.  
(H3) Users will prefer the LED navigation system over the SPND. 
More subjects preferred the LED system than not, but some of 
them had reservations towards using it as a sole navigation device. 
6. CONCLUSION
With the LED PND our participants had a higher PDT on the 
outside world, and better driving performance, than when they 
used the standard PND. Furthermore, as shown in Table 1, when 
using the LED PND, they hardly ever looked at the LED array. 
This indicates that they used their peripheral vision to gather 
information from the LED PND. Thus, our results suggest that 
using a peripheral means of navigation, such as the LED PND, 
might be a better alternative to a standard PND. Subjective 
assessments also favored the LED PND, and participants felt that 
with it they relied on their peripheral vision (which is confirmed 
by the data in Table 1). 
These results encourage us to continue exploring augmented 
reality, even in its current unsophisticated form, as a potentially 
useful technology for in-car navigation. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was supported by the US Department of Justice under 
grants 2009D1BXK021 and 2010DDBXK226. 
8. REFERENCES 
[1]
Fröhlich, P., Baldauf, M., Hagen, M., Suette, S., Schabus, D.,  
Kun, A.L., Investigating Safety Services on the Motorway: 
The Role of Realistic Visualization. In Proc. AutomotiveUI 
2011, ACM Press (2011). 
[2]
GreenStar Lightbar by John Deere. 
http://www.deere.com/wps/dcom/en_INT/products/equipmen
t/agricultural_management_solutions/guidance_and_machine
_control/greenstar_lightbar/greenstar_lightbar.page 
[3]
Horrey, W. J., Wickens, C. D., and Alexander, A. L. The 
Effects of Head-Up Display Clutter and In-Vehicle Display 
Separation on Concurrent Driving Performance. In Proc. 
HFES 47th Annual Meeting (2003). 
[4]
Kim, S. and Dey, A. K. Simulated augmented reality 
windshield display as a cognitive mapping aid for elder 
driver navigation. In Proc. CHI 2009, ACM Press (2009), 
133-142. 
[5]
Kun, A.L., Paek, T., Medenica, Z., Memarovic, N., Palinko, 
O. Glancing at Personal Navigation Devices Can Affect 
Driving: Experimental Results and Design Implications. In 
Proc. AutomotiveUI 2009, ACM Press (2009), 129-136. 
[6]
Liu, Y.C. Effects of using head-up display in automobile 
context on attention demand and driving performance. 
Displays 24, 4-5 (2003), 157-165. 
[7]
Medenica, Z., Kun A.L., Paek T., and Palinko, O. 
Augmented Reality vs. Street Views: A Driving Simulator 
Study Comparing Two Emerging Navigation Aids. In Proc. 
MobileHCI’11, ACM Press (2011). 
[8]
Steinfeld, A. and Green, P. Driver Responses to Navigation 
Information on Full-Windshield, Head-Up Displays. Int’l 
Journal of Vehicle Design 19, 2 (1998), 135-149. 
[9]
Tangmanee, K. and Teeravarunyou, S. Effects of Guided 
Arrows on Head-Up Display Towards the Vehicle 
Windshield, SEANES 2012, IEEE (2012). 
[10] Video of the LED AR device:  http://youtu.be/Y-gnObrkRvY
[11] Video of the SPND device: http://youtu.be/yji4cR7ywKo 
[12] Wikitude Drive. http://www.wikitude.org/en/drive 


