electronics
Article
Ergonomic Guidelines of Head-Up Display User
Interface during Semi-Automated Driving
Kibum Park 1
and Youngjae Im 2,*
1
School of Industrial and Management Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Korea;
masterkey@korea.ac.kr
2
Faculty of Human-System Design Engineering, Dong-eui University, Busan 47340, Korea
*
Correspondence: ergolim@gmail.com
Received: 4 March 2020; Accepted: 1 April 2020; Published: 3 April 2020


Abstract: Self-driving vehicles are emerging as a result of technological advances, and the range
of human behavior is expanding. The collateral information on driving is increasing, and head-up
displays (HUDs) can be coupled with augmented reality displays to convey additional information to
drivers in innovative ways. Interference between the actual driving environment and the displayed
information can cause distractions. Research is required to ﬁnd out what information should be
displayed and how to properly display it considering the number of information, as well as the
location and arrangement of the HUD. This study aims to examine the types of HUD information
presentation that enhance the driver’s intuitive understanding. The ﬁrst experiment identiﬁed which
information aﬀects drivers more in self-driving conditions in terms of error rate and importance. As a
result, information that the drivers consider to be of greater importance or more relevant to their
safety was selected. The level of HUD information complexity was assessed in the second experiment.
The independent variables were the number of symbols, location of the HUD, and arrangement of
the HUD. The results showed that the number of symbols was most aﬀected and that fewer than
six should be displayed. Besides, the arrangement of contents was more intuitive when a vertical
alignment was used, and the main content should be placed in the center of the windshield area.
Finally, ergonomic design guidelines of the information presentation type are proposed in this study.
Keywords:
head-up display;
HUD; user interface;
ergonomics;
information complexity;
automated driving; self-driving vehicles; windshield display; infotainment
1. Introduction
From past research, a series of guidelines are available to identify human–machine interfaces and
to improve the physical and cognitive usability of the product [1]. In particular, the automobile industry
needs to simultaneously satisfy the driver’s safety and convenience with the special circumstances of
the driving environment. With the recent convergence trend with information and communication
technology, vehicles are being built with in-vehicle information systems (IVIS) and developed into
an interactive communication medium between the vehicle and the driver in real-time, beyond the
value of the mobility system [2]. As the development of in-vehicle information systems continues to
expand the display area, which provides in-vehicle driving, entertainment, and convenient information,
the need is increased for an intuitive and insightful content delivery interface for drivers [3–5].
The level of complexity of information displayed within the vehicle is increasing with the
recent advances in self-driving vehicle technology [6]. Thus, the development of a head-up display
(HUD) that delivers virtual images to the driver through media such as windshields is continuing,
with the driver’s range of activities expanding and the display providing information on driving
assistance, entertainment, and driver-friendly functions. Due to the development of information and
Electronics 2020, 9, 611; doi:10.3390/electronics9040611
www.mdpi.com/journal/electronics


Electronics 2020, 9, 611
2 of 16
communication technology, the HUD emerged as a research topic for conveying virtual information
to drivers through augmented reality (AR), such as preventing collisions between pedestrians and
vehicles [7]. The HUD improves driving performance more than the head-down display (HDD) and
has a higher preference [8,9]. The performance is also aﬀected by the area and layout of the HUD
and, trust, conﬁdence, and predictability factors also tend to increase if the HUD is combined with
speech and becomes multimodal [10,11]. This not only reduces the driver’s visual distractions but also
improves cognitive judgment [12,13], whereas the overall market demand for HUD, which encompasses
windshield and combiner types, is also on a steady rise [14].
With the development of IVIS, such as in-vehicle entertainment and driving assistance systems,
the importance of the HUD, which assists the vehicle-to-driver interface, is increasingly being
emphasized. However, in driving situations where visual elements are essential, the information
provided during driving should be visually recognizable by the driver up to 90% and the display
should be designed to inhibit the distraction of focus in complex systems and to prevent split
attention [15,16]. Research was carried out providing systematic information on how to commercialize
HUDs, human factors, etc. [17]. A study of the interface between the vehicle and the driver by applying
AR, which provides an intuitive and immersive experience, showed that, although the challenge
of perception problems should be solved in the HUD, it reduces response time and increases the
likelihood of detecting other hazards [18–21]. HUD-based studies on some elements, such as left-turn
and right-turn content, were conducted, but systematic guidelines that include diverse elements and
that take safety into account are needed [22,23].
Therefore, if the in-vehicle display overlaps with road information during the driver’s process
of accepting and manipulating information, an interface design is required to reduce the recognition
errors of displayed images and minimize any obstacles to safe driving, such as distractions [24,25].
The HUD needs to be noted as an alternative to an ergonomic design that can provide more diverse
information while reducing the divergence of the driver’s eyes. To present information considering
safety and convenience, organized contextual information is required by type, and element studies
related to structured contextual interfaces such as types, functions, and tasks must precede speciﬁc
visualizations [26,27].
2. Research Objectives
The aim of this study is an evaluation of the complexity of information presentation determined
by design factors such as the number of information, area of the HUD, and arrangement of the HUD.
The ergonomic design guidelines of the HUD are assessed in terms of the driver’s performance and
workload. The derived guidelines are utilized to construct an interaction method to be used in the
future for windshields, whereby the driver remains aware of the driving situation.
This study investigates the complexity of how automotive HUDs are displayed in the windshield.
The study was conducted in four stages, as shown in Figure 1. In detail, it was undertaken sequentially
by researching HUD contents through literature and market reviews, conducting the ﬁrst test of
selecting information objects to be displayed, while performing the second test on the number of
information, area of the HUD, and arrangement of the HUD, as well as drawing out the display method
guidelines for the ﬁnal selected information.
Before the full-scale experiment, a total of 44 factors were selected with 14 factors related to
urgency, 14 factors related to general driver information (GDI), and 16 factors related to IVIS based
on the automobile market survey and literature survey considering regions such as Europe, Asia,
and the Americas. Selected information was ﬁrstly selected with a high frequency of investigation
in the existing literature [28–32]; however, even though the frequency of the investigation was small,
additional information that had a signiﬁcant safety concern was included.
The purpose of the ﬁrst experiment was to select the information content displayed on the HUD.
The second experiment sought to identify how design variables related to the HUD, including the
number of information, area of the HUD, and arrangement of the HUD, aﬀected the driver’s response.


Electronics 2020, 9, 611
3 of 16
Figure 1. Research ﬂow.
3. First Experiment
3.1. Method
3.1.1. Participants
A total of 21 experimental participants were used to conduct the ﬁrst test, aged 20 to 54, who mainly
drive. They consisted of twelve males and nine females, and the average age was 29.57 (SD = 5.29)
years old. All of the participants can drive, had a driver’s license, and had satisfactory eyesight and
hearing to do this test. Experimental participants were also recruited to have more than two years of
driving experience, and the average driving experience for participants was 5.86 years (SD = 4.51).
Furthermore, all participants were given enough time to practice in advance.
3.1.2. Apparatus
The environment conﬁgured for the ﬁrst test consisted of a driver-centered driving environment
through Gridspace’s Driving Simulator Equipment GDS-Driving 300/L Model, as shown in Figure 2.
Three 43-inch monitors and a 17-inch touchscreen controller, an automatic shift lever, pedals, and gears
were built for the experimental environment.
Figure 2. Driving simulator employed in experiment.


Electronics 2020, 9, 611
4 of 16
3.1.3. Experimental Design
The kind of information that can be displayed on the HUD was selected as the design variable for
the experiment. The 44 factors selected based on literature research and market research were re-selected
based on the frequency and important issues of safety. As a result, a total of 24 factors were selected
for urgency, GDI, and IVIS information, as shown in Table 1. Each factor referred to icons or pictorial
shapes used in various regions, including North America, Europe, and Asia, and they were ﬁnally
presented after being reproduced by visual designers. Each image was redesigned through the designer
after referring to properties such as the color and contrast of the ISO standard [33], reviewing the
images used in the classiﬁcation system in the study of the Tretten et al. [7], and considering the images
currently used by various automotive manufacturers in various countries.
Table 1. Categorization of factors
Categorization of factors
No.
Urgency
GDI (General Driver Information)
IVIS (In-Vehicle Information System)
1
Low window washer ﬂuid
Speedometer
Excessive speed status
2
Low fuel level
Trip computer
Lane change help
3
Engine stall
Outside temperature
Road image at night or poor
weather conditions
4
Oil pressure
Cruise control
External speed control
5
Anti-lock braking system
(ABS) failure
Multimedia
Road hinders image
6
Low tire pressure
Phone
Navigator
7
Door is ajar
Buckle seatbelt reminder
Video of passengers
8
Malfunctioning light bulb
Which door is ajar
Status of driver
Error rates and importance were chosen as the dependent variables for assessing the driver’s
response. The driver’s error rate for information recognition was deﬁned as the rate of frequency at
which the driver failed to respond to the information properly or respond when the contents were
presented on the windshield while driving.
In addition, importance was deﬁned as the importance level the driver felt for each factor after
performing the task of responding when the information was presented on the windshield while
driving. The importance was measured as a seven-point Likert scale taking into account the functional
aspects of both driving and non-driving situations.
3.1.4. Experimental Procedure
The procedure for the ﬁrst experiment was as follows: at ﬁrst, the purpose of the study and
the main tasks were explained to the participants. The participant highlighted various factors when
a total of 24 items were displayed while driving. Next, the error rate and importance level were
measured when participants responded to each factor displayed sequentially while driving. Then,
a post-interview was conducted to collect subjective data. The error rate was measured as the frequency
ratio of cases which were correctly recognized when information was presented on the windshield.
The importance level was assessed as the extent to which the driver felt each factor was important
after performing the task. Each of the eight factors of Urgency, GDI, and IVIS classiﬁcation systems
was evaluated once, and all participants were given suﬃcient prior practice time.
3.2. Results of First Test
3.2.1. Error Rate
The error rate of information in the IVIS classiﬁcation was relatively higher compared to other
classiﬁcations. Among them, over-speed status indication (error rate: 0.24), road image display at


Electronics 2020, 9, 611
5 of 16
night or in bad atmospheric conditions (error rate: 0.10), and speed control considering the external
environment (error rate: 0.33) were found to be high because of their complex level even within IVIS.
For information within the GDI classiﬁcation, the error rates for trip computers (error rate: 0.10) and
cruise control (error rate: 0.10), where information complexity is relatively high, were high compared
to other classiﬁcations. In the urgency category, for features with the high complexity of information,
the driver’s mind was not perfectly matched, resulting in a high error rate for oil pressure (error rate:
0.14) and low tire pressure (error rate: 0.10).
3.2.2. Importance Level
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to determine whether each factor was meaningful
in terms of the importance level. The results showed that statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences for each
factor were found (p < 0.001). Furthermore, the results of the analysis of importance of each classiﬁed
factor showed that the information in the urgency group related to safety was relatively important,
with a closer relationship to safety denoting higher importance as shown in Figure 3. Factors in the
GDI group also showed that safety-related information was more important than additional functions
such as multimedia or telephone functions. Finally, in the case of information in the IVIS group,
safety-related factors were also was found to be relatively important.
Figure 3. Importance level for each factor.
4. Second Experiment
4.1. Method
4.1.1. Participants
A total of 12 experimental participants were used to conduct the second test, aged 20 to 54,
who mainly drive. They consisted of nine males and three females, and the average age was 27 (SD =
4.31) years old. All of the participants were able to drive, had a driver’s license, and had satisfactory
eyesight and hearing to do this test. Experimental participants were also recruited to have than two
years of driving experience, and the average driving experience for participants was 6.5 years (SD =
5.14). Four participants had the experience with using an HUD.
4.1.2. Apparatus
The driving environment conﬁgured for the second test was the same as the driving simulator
used in the ﬁrst test.


Electronics 2020, 9, 611
6 of 16
4.1.3. Experimental Design
Experimental Variables
The variables, including the number of information, area of the HUD, and arrangement of the
HUD, were selected as the main experimental variables aﬀecting the search for driver information on
the windshield. The display area of the HUD was composed of three levels, taking into account the
degree of information access eﬀort (IAE) required to change the attention from one area of interest
(AOI) to another [24]. As shown in Figure 4, the area variables, deﬁned as left (area 1), middle (area 2),
and right (area 3) in this experiment, were positioned horizontally 20 cm apart, relative to the center
area. The area in which each of the alternatives in this experiment was presented was established
to account for the characteristics that can be perceived only by eye movements, given the eﬀort for
visual attention.
Figure 4. Classiﬁcation for areas of head-up display (HUD).
In this study, it was assumed that the arrangement of information on the windshield would also
aﬀect the visual search response. Based on prior research and market research, it was divided into
two array levels [31,32]. In the previous experiment, the characteristics of the information related to
urgency were usually referenced to the vertical arrangement in the left-hand area, while those related
to GDI or IVIS were relatively diverse. In this experiment, information related to urgency, as shown in
Figure 5, was applied with a left vertical arrangement, and the information related to GDI and IVIS
was applied with a horizontal and vertical arrangement. Therefore, information related to GDI and
IVIS, incorporating this diﬀerence, was arranged in two levels, either vertically (arrangement 1) or
horizontally (arrangement 2).
Figure 5. Classiﬁcation for arrangement of HUD.
The level of the number of information in this experiment allowed deﬁning three levels for
information quantity, as shown in Table 2. In detail, the total amount of information at level 1 consisted
of three factors, including one each for urgency, GDI, and IVIS classiﬁcations. The total amount of
information at level 2 consisted of six factors, with two each for the urgency, GDI, and IVIS categories.
Finally, the total amount of information at level 3 consisted of nine factors, with three each for urgency,
GDI, and IVIS classiﬁcations. Therefore, the amount of information included three, six, and nine factors
for each level. An example of an alternative display in a real experiment is shown in Figure 6.


Electronics 2020, 9, 611
7 of 16
Table 2. Composition of the three levels describing the number of information.
The Level of the Number of Information
Total Factor Quantity
Urgency
GDI
IVIS
1
3
1
1
1
2
6
2
2
2
3
9
3
3
3
Figure 6. Three levels of information.
Dependent Variables
The response time in this experiment was deﬁned as the time it took to recognize the information.
When alternative information was presented to the driver’s windshield, this variable was determined
by measuring the time it took the driver to respond verbally after recognizing the displayed object.
In this experiment, sophistication was added in such a way that the controller automatically recorded
the time until the respondent’s oral response. Since a change in the number of questions could aﬀect
the workload in itself, the number of questions regarding each function was ﬁxed at three per round.
The participants were expected to respond with the function name for each question, including factors
for urgency, GDI, and IVIS classiﬁcations. The modiﬁed Cooper–Harper handling scale (MCH) was
applied to measure the subjective workload felt by participants [34]. The MCH has a scale of 10 degrees,
with larger values denoting greater diﬃculty. Speciﬁcally, a rating of 9–10 requires a redesign because
it is diﬃcult to easily accommodate the displayed information, a rating of 6–8 requires improvement in
the information displayed to analyze the situation, and a rating of 3–5 requires minor improvement in
the information displayed to facilitate decision-making. Lastly, a rating of 1–2 describes a level where
information can be displayed to help make decisions.
4.1.4. Experimental Procedure
The procedure for the second experiment was ﬁrstly described to the participants, along with the
purpose of the study and its main tasks, before conducting the designated tests. This task involved
identifying and responding to the designated information on the windshield during each round while
driving. Next, data on the response time and subjective workload for the task were collected, along with
a post-interview. The order of experiments was counterbalanced randomly and repeated 18 times
according to the combination of the level of independent variables for each participant (the number of
information (3) × area of the HUD (3) × arrangement of the HUD (2)). In addition, ﬁve minutes of rest
were granted every 30 min to remove the eﬀect of fatigue caused by repeated performance.
4.2. Results of Second Test
4.2.1. Reaction Time
To determine if each design variable for the reaction time was signiﬁcant, repeated measures
(RM)-ANOVA was performed. Mauchly’s spherical test results showed that the signiﬁcance of the
number of information, area of the HUD, and the arrangement of the HUD was greater than 0.05.


Electronics 2020, 9, 611
8 of 16
Therefore, a single-variable analysis should be applied, because the experiment satisﬁed the sphericity
requirement. The RM-ANOVA results were found to have signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the number of
information, area of the HUD, and arrangement of the HUD at a signiﬁcance level of 0.05, as presented
in Table 3. Interactions between factors were shown to be insigniﬁcant.
Table 3. Repeated measures (RM)-ANOVA results for response time.
Source
SS
df
MS
F
p
The number of information
149.807
2
74.904
115.691
<0.000**
Area of HUD
6.001
2
3.000
5.037
0.016*
Arrangement of HUD
12.097
1
12.097
34.612
<0.000**
The number of information × area of HUD
1.193
4
0.298
0.658
0.625
The number of information × arrangement of HUD
0.383
2
0.192
0.566
0.576
Area of HUD × arrangement of HUD
0.285
2
0.143
0.807
0.459
The number of information × area of HUD × arrangement of HUD
0.793
4
0.198
0.833
0.511
* Signiﬁcant at α = 0.05, ** Signiﬁcant at α = 0.01
Firstly, the results for the response time according to the level of the number of information and
area of HUD are shown in Figure 7. Responses tended to slow down as the amount of information
increased. In the case of the area of HUD, one of the design variables, the response was speedy when
area 2, and areas 1 and 3 were relatively slow. The response time between the two areas was also
shown to be similar. If the number of information is less than three, it is advisable to present the
information in area 2. Additionally, if the number of information is less than six, the main information
may be placed in area 2, and the remaining sub-information may be placed in area 1 or area 3.
Figure 7. Reaction time according to the level of the number of information and area of HUD.
Next, the results for the response time according to the arrangement of HUD and the level of the
number of information are shown in Figure 8. As the amount of information increased, driver response
tended to slow down. For the arrangement of HUD design variable, it was shown that the responses
were slow with arrangement 2 and fast with arrangement 1. With regard to the number of information,
fewer than six were found to be appropriate, whereas the arrangement of the HUD should be arranged
in arrangement 1 rather than in arrangement 2.


Electronics 2020, 9, 611
9 of 16
Figure 8. Reaction time according to the level of the number of information and arrangement of HUD.
4.2.2. Subjective Workload
To determine if each design variable for the subjective workload was signiﬁcant, RM-ANOVA
was performed. Mauchly’s spherical test results showed that the signiﬁcance of the level of the number
of information, area of the HUD, and arrangement of the HUD was greater than 0.05. Therefore,
a single-variable analysis should be applied, because the experiment satisﬁed the sphericity requirement.
The RM-ANOVA results were found to have signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the level of the number of
information, area of the HUD, and arrangement of the HUD at a signiﬁcance level of 0.05, as presented
in Table 4. Interactions between factors were shown to be insigniﬁcant.
Table 4. RM-ANOVA results for subjective workload.
Source
SS
df
MS
F
p
The number of information
144.009
2
72.005
138.529
<0.000**
Area of HUD
9.509
2
4.755
3.883
0.036*
Arrangement of HUD
5.671
1
5.671
5.037
0.046*
The number of information × area of HUD
2.102
4
0.525
2.143
0.091
The number of information × arrangement of HUD
0.898
2
0.449
1.370
0.275
Area of HUD × arrangement of HUD
0.454
2
0.227
0.576
0.570
The number of information × area of HUD × arrangement of HUD
1.435
4
0.359
1.464
0.230
* Signiﬁcant at α = 0.05, ** Signiﬁcant at α = 0.01
Firstly, the results for the subjective workload according to the number of information and area of
HUD are shown in Figure 9. Subjective workload tended to increase as the amount of information
increased. With regard to the area of HUD, the subjective workload was relatively low in area 2,
while it was relatively high in areas 1 and 3. Furthermore, the subjective workload between the two
areas was shown to be similar. Fewer than six information is appropriate to display, whereas area 2 or
area 3 can be used if there is fewer than three information. Moreover, if the number of information is
fewer than six, the main information may be placed in area 2, while the remaining sub-information
may be placed in area 1 or area 3.
Next, the results for the subjective workload according to the arrangement of HUD and level
of the number of information are shown in Figure 10. As the amount of information increased,
subjective workload tended to increase. For the arrangement of HUD design variable, the workload was
shown to be high with arrangement 2, while the workload was small with arrangement 1. Fewer than


Electronics 2020, 9, 611
10 of 16
six information was found to be appropriate, and it was recommended that the arrangement of the
HUD should feature one layout rather than two.
Figure 9. Modiﬁed Cooper–Harper handling (MCH) scale according to the level of the number of
information and area of HUD.
Figure 10. MCH scale according to the level of the number of information and arrangement of HUD.
5. Discussion
Although HUD-related technologies are becoming increasingly commercialized, they should be
presented in appropriate areas, taking into account the speciﬁc nature of the driving situation and
driver safety. Therefore, the HUD area should be classiﬁed to include restricted and expandable
areas, not limited to the optimal layout, and this should be applied in an informational manner that is
intuitive for the driver and reduces the workload of drivers. Issues concerning the safety of HUDs,
such as focal distance or external object perception, as well as object–road and object–object overlap,
can have a signiﬁcant negative impact. Therefore, HUD usability studies should be conducted within
appropriate methodological paradigms and experimental designs. Moreover, AR still faces a number
of technical challenges, and human factors should also be addressed [35,36].
The concept of HUDs was raised for decades, but they were found to be diﬃcult to apply to
vehicles other than airplanes [37]. The safety beneﬁts of HUDs are generally small, and, in some
instances, HUDs produce poorer performance [38]. After the evolution of self-driving technology,


Electronics 2020, 9, 611
11 of 16
image display through AR has the potential to enhance road safety, induce intuitive driving activities,
and improve driving experience. However, the AR technology level, applicable area, luminance, etc.
should be more developed. Relevant studies are still being performed through driving simulators
rather than in a real road environment [38–40]. Based on past research, it is important to consider
driver safety and visual distractions in HUD design [37]. Relevant studies on the display area of HUD
information also examined the driver’s response to each HUD area and provided design guidelines
for the driver’s preferred area. Several prior studies analyzed driver response time and preference
changes depending on the display area of the warning image presented on the HUD [41]. Summing up
the results of the HUD preference areas presented in the relevant study showed that areas in the left
and right directions, with the driver’s seat as the reference center, performed well and were preferable.
These results were consistent at a certain level in terms of the results and trends derived from this study.
However, unlike several previous studies that identiﬁed diﬀerences in driver preference depending
on the location of the HUD image, the study in Park et al. [24] showed that performance in the lower
left or lower right areas was found to be relatively low after considering detailed investigation results
speciﬁc to the driver’s windshield; thus, this study applied three horizontal areas.
For this reason, the task presented in this study ﬁrstly involved recent information considering
technology trends in semi-automated driving situations, resulting in a diﬀerence in diﬃculty compared
to the situation of staring at simple roads, as applied in previous studies. This presented a diﬀerence with
existing studies using simple or ﬁxed forms of visual images, such as warning displays. For example,
the study in Park et al. [41] looked at changes in driver preference depending on the location of the
HUD image by performing object navigation and selection on a single-line scrolling list while driving.
However, this study provided the driver with a more interactive situation with a task diﬃculty that
appropriately reﬂects the variability of driver distraction to the same extent as an actual driving
situation, while not interfering with the road operation.
On the other hand, in experiments that gave drivers warning signs and recognized responses,
such as the study by Morita et al. [42], the middle area was found to be optimal to perform object
navigation and selection, although areas below 4◦–5◦were most preferred compared to the middle
area. This result was consistent with the optimal area, i.e., the middle area, found in the study of HUD
speedometer recognition and control by aircraft pilots [43]. Thus, as cognitive workload increases,
the middle area can be interpreted as optimal. Next, there were diﬀerences in results depending
on whether the task was assigned only on the driver-side windshield area. Considering only the
driver-side windshield area, a more spatial, speciﬁc area investigation is possible, and the accuracy of
the task itself can be increased by minimizing driver distraction. Wittmann et al. [44] revealed that the
preferred range was not derived at various levels when the range of areas on the driver’s side was
addressed in a wider area than the windshield. The results of another study [7] that dealt only with
driver-side windshield areas showed that the preferred area is not only in the middle but also along
the horizontal axis, resulting in similar results to those of this study.
The HUD design guidelines we presented were tested by assuming that the information is basically
provided in self-driving mode only. In our previous study [24], classifying the area of the HUD in
semi-automated driving conditions showed that using horizontal central areas does not cause usability
problems for the driver’s response. The tendency to increase the search time as more objects were found
was similarly considered [45,46]. Therefore, this study, which examined the complexity of how displays
with multiple content are presented, arrayed three to nine information per area to maintain a certain
level of diﬃculty in the experimental task without driving overload. Previous studies [47–49] found
that the use of an HUD increases subjective safety but does not cause excessive distraction, and that
the actual response time for speed limit tasks was better derived. Furthermore, relevant studies [50,51]
showed that various information resources are more accessible to drivers than when using an HDD
(head-down display). The comparison analysis was conducted by focusing on using the HUD under
both low and high driving workload [52]. Speciﬁcally, the driver’s response using the HUD was


Electronics 2020, 9, 611
12 of 16
better in terms of vehicle control behavior (i.e., variance in steering wheel angle and mean lateral lane
position) and the driver’s attention demands (i.e., variance in lateral acceleration).
A review of how information is presented, including visual elements of the HUD, such as location,
arrangement, and color, showed that a two-dimensional image of distance intuitively provided to the
driver has a low workload [53]. A leading study of information types and levels of numbers in the
HUD showed more than double the response time as the number increased from four to seven [13,47].
In this study, the number of information was fewer than six, showing similar results. A study looking
at the display area and arrangement [54] placed driving-related content on the driver-side windshield
and multimedia functions such as the Internet on the central windshield. In this study, the scope of the
area was limited to the driver-side windshield; thus, the main content was placed in area 2 and other
content was placed in area 1 and area 3. In addition, this study conﬁrmed the result of similar workload
occurring between areas 1 and 3. Furthermore, some studies examined the perception of the size and
arrangement of the information displayed in the HUD [55]; however, the priority or inﬂuence degree
of the levels of the of information, area, and arrangement was diﬀerent from this study, because it was
diﬃcult to grasp. In particular, with regard to the arrangement of the HUD, the ﬁnal selection of the
vertical and horizontal type was made by considering the diﬀerent arrangement methods investigated
by Cho et al. [31]. Thus, the selected information in this study showed that the vertical type was
slightly better than the horizontal type. However, the arrangement factor was less inﬂuential than the
other design variable, i.e., the amount of information. This result could be changed depending on the
type of information.
There were some limitations of this study. Not all of the design variables aﬀecting the driver
were considered in this study, as the level of display, optics, and information and communication
technologies are constantly evolving; thus, some issues that are aﬀected by technology trends when it
comes to the degree of practicability of complexity for their expression were not considered. Next,
the restriction of distraction with respect to the driver’s eyes increases the accident rate after 1.5 to 2 s;
thus, it is not feasible to immediately increase the display complexity when self-driving technology is
not suﬃciently advanced [56]. Because this experiment was conducted on a driving simulator, we made
an eﬀort to mirror the environment using a windshield in a real vehicle. To verify the eﬀect of individual
diﬀerence, a statistical analysis of gender eﬀect was conducted. The results of the t-test showed that
the eﬀect of the gender group on response time was not statistically signiﬁcant (p = 0.131). The average
response times for men and women were 4.21 ± 1.11 and 3.96 ± 0.98, respectively. This study focused
on the derivation of general design guidelines for HUDs. Although this experiment was performed
in a highway driving environment, other factors such as traﬃc density or road conditions should be
further considered.
Depending on the preference of the driver’s level of information acceptance, the information
displayed in the HUD may receive a negative response. To address this, an adaptable interface
design should be introduced to take into account the factors that can inspire user experience by
considering those who prefer low information acceptance [57,58]. The adaptable interface design can
be appropriately considered for intuitiveness and safety, which familiarizes the driver with the context
for vehicle information. For example, it is more necessary to facilitate drivers with GDI and IVIS than
urgent information. Thus, adaptive interfaces should be provided to fulﬁll the type of information and
the extent of driver acceptance. Although this study classiﬁed the information in terms of urgency,
GDI, and IVIS based on the literature review, there may be more diverse dimensions such as severity or
infotainment. Moreover, further studies of HUD representation require an ongoing review to identify
priorities for design variables and to highlight upcoming technical situations reﬂecting AR.
6. Conclusions
The detailed results of this study were as follows: ﬁrstly, when considering the proper area of the
windshield, the design variable showed that the level of the number of information displayed has a
greater eﬀect than the area of the HUD or the arrangement of the HUD. The number of information


Electronics 2020, 9, 611
13 of 16
presented should be fewer than 6. Furthermore, the main information should be presented on the
driver’s central side, and the sub-information should be displayed on the left and right sides of the
driver’s horizontal area of the windshield. As for the arrangement method, vertical arrangements
were found to be more intuitive to the driver than horizontal ones. However, since its inﬂuence degree
was lower than that of the level of the number of information, the information should be selected based
on the arrangement of the HUD according to its attributes.
The results of this study are expected to be a basic representation of the proper area classiﬁcation
and complexity of display methods when HUD information is displayed to drivers in a vehicle.
In addition, road environment variables and more diverse information should be continuously
reviewed using equipment such as eye trackers. Therefore, it is necessary to study the mode of display
presentation considering the driver’s response and distraction in actual vehicles. Further research is
also required to take into account a wider variety of scenarios and information presentation methods
applicable in future operational situations.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, K.P. and Y.I.; methodology, Y.I.; writing—original draft preparation,
K.P.; writing—review and editing, K.P, and Y.I. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂicts of interest.
References
1.
Wagner,
D.;
Birt,
J.A.;
Snyder,
M.D.;
Duncanson,
J.P.
Human
Factors
Design
Guide
for
Acquisition of Commercial-oﬀ-the-Shelf Subsystems, Non-Developmental Items, and Developmental Systems;
No. DOT/FAA/CT-96/1; DOT, FAA Technical Center: Atlantic City, NJ, USA, 1996. [CrossRef]
2.
Kohlhaas, R.; Schamm, T.; Lenk, D.; Zöllner, J.M. Towards driving autonomously: Autonomous cruise
control in urban environments. In Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV); IEEE: Gold Coast, Australia, 2013;
pp. 116–121. [CrossRef]
3.
Gabbard, J.L.; Fitch, G.M.; Kim, H. Behind the Glass: Driver Challenges and Opportunities for AR Automotive
Applications. Proc. IEEE 2014, 102, 124–136. [CrossRef]
4.
Lee, J.M.; Ju, D.Y. Prioritization analysis for contents sensibility evaluation of the future mobility. Korean J.
Sci. Emot. Sensib. 2018, 21, 3–16. [CrossRef]
5.
Park, K.; Jung, E.S.; Im, Y. Aﬀective Design of Automotive Center Fascia Display: Focused on Regional
Preference. J. Ergon. Soc. Korea 2019, 38, 279–289. [CrossRef]
6.
SAE. Automated Driving: Levels of Driving Automation Are Deﬁned in New SAE International Standard J3016;
Society of Automotive Engineers: Warrendale, PA, USA, 2014.
7.
Tretten, P. Information Design Solutions for Automotive Displays:
Focus on HUD. Ph.D. Thesis,
Luleå Tekniska Universitet, Luleå, Sweden, 2011.
8.
Shahriar, S.T.; Kun, A.L. Camera-View Augmented Reality: Overlaying Navigation Instructions on a
Real-Time View of the Road. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Automotive User
Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications—AutomotiveUI, Toronto, ON, Canada, 23–25 September
2018; Volume 18, pp. 146–154. [CrossRef]
9.
Topliss, B.H.; Pampel, S.M.; Burnett, G.; Gabbard, J.L. Evaluating Head-Up Displays across Windshield
Locations. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive
Vehicular Applications—AutomotiveUI, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 22–25 September 2019; Volume 19,
pp. 244–253. [CrossRef]
10.
Häuslschmid, R.; Ren, D.; Alt, F.; Butz, A.; Höllerer, T. Personalizing Content Presentation on Large 3D
Head-Up Displays. PRESENCE Virtual Augment. Real. 2019, 27, 80–106. [CrossRef]
11.
Large, D.R.; Kim, H.; Merenda, C.; Leong, S.; Harvey, C.; Burnett, G.; Gabbard, J. Investigating the eﬀect of
urgency and modality of pedestrian alert warnings on driver acceptance and performance. Transp. Res. Part
F Traﬃc Psychol. Behav. 2019, 60, 11–24. [CrossRef]
12.
Kim, K.H.; Jang, J.C.; Han, S.C. Current Status and Prospect of Automotive Augmented Reality. In KEIT PD
Issue Report; KEIT: Daegu, Korea, 2015; pp. 13–29.


Electronics 2020, 9, 611
14 of 16
13.
Häuslschmid, R.; Osterwald, S.; Lang, M.; Butz, A. Augmenting the Driver’s View with Peripheral Information
on a Windshield Display. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces
ACM, Atlanta, GA, USA, 29 March–1 April 2015; pp. 311–321. [CrossRef]
14.
Brian, R. Vehicle Displays and Interfaces Symposium. Burton Manor Conference Center Livonia; Automotive IQ:
Berlin, Germany, 2016.
15.
Beggiato, M.; Hartwich, F.; Schleinitz, K.; Krems, J.; Othersen, I.; Petermann-Stock, I. What would drivers
like to know during automated driving? Information needs at diﬀerent levels of automation. In Proceedings
of the 7. Tagung Fahrerassistenzsysteme, Munich, Germany, 25–26 November 2015.
16.
Wickens, C.D.; Hollands, J.G.; Banbury, S.; Parasuraman, R. Engineering Psychology & Human Performance;
Psychology Press: Hove, UK, 2015.
17.
Naujoks, F.; Purucker, C.; Wiedemann, K.; Marberger, C. Noncritical State Transitions during Conditionally
Automated Driving on German Freeways: Eﬀects of Non–Driving Related Tasks on Takeover Time and
Takeover Quality. Hum. Factors 2019. [CrossRef]
18.
Bark, K.; Tran, C.; Fujimura, K.; Ng-Thow-Hing, V. Personal Navi: Beneﬁts of an Augmented Reality
Navigational Aid Using a See-Thru 3D Volumetric HUD. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference
on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications, Seattle, WA, USA, 17–19 September
2014; pp. 1–8. [CrossRef]
19.
Schneider, M.; Bruder, A.; Necker, M.; Schluesener, T.; Henze, N.; Wolﬀ, C. A ﬁeld study to collect
expert knowledge for the development of AR HUD navigation concepts. In Proceedings of the 11th
International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications Adjunct
Proceedings—AutomotiveUI, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 22–25 September 2019; Volume 19, pp. 358–362.
[CrossRef]
20.
Eyraud, R.; Zibetti, E.; Baccino, T. Allocation of visual attention while driving with simulated augmented
reality. Transp. Res. Part F Traﬃc Psychol. Behav. 2015, 32, 46–55. [CrossRef]
21.
Rusch, M.L.; Schall, M.C.; Gavin, P.; Lee, J.D.; Dawson, J.D.; Vecera, S.; Rizzo, M. Directing driver attention
with augmented reality cues. Transp. Res. Part F Traﬃc Psychol. Behav. 2013, 16, 127–137. [CrossRef]
22.
Na, J.Y.; Baek, S.D.; Heo, J.Y. Head-Up Display (HUD) Interface Design of Navigation co-nsidering User’s
Decision Context. In Proceedings of the 5th HCI KOREA, Jeongsun, Kangwon, Korea, 8–10 Feburary 2017.
23.
Meixner, G.; Häcker, C.; Decker, B.; Gerlach, S.; Hess, A.; Holl, K.; Klaus, A.; Lüddecke, D.; Mauser, D.;
Orfgen, M.; et al. Retrospective and future automotive infotainment systems—100 years of user interface
evolution. In Automotive User Interfaces; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2017; pp. 3–53. [CrossRef]
24.
Park, K.B.; Jung, E.S.; Ban, K.M.; Im, Y.J. A Study about classiﬁcation of the areas of Head-Up Display(HUD)
on Driving. J. Ergon. Soc. Korea 2018, 37. [CrossRef]
25.
Von Sawitzky, T.; Wintersberger, P.; Riener, A.; Gabbard, J.L. Increasing trust in fully automated driving:
Route indication on an augmented reality head-up display. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM International
Symposium on Pervasive Displays—PerDis, Palermo, Italy, 12–14 June 2019; Volume 19, pp. 1–7. [CrossRef]
26.
Park, J.W.; Kim, J.; Park, J.; Lee, Y.J.; Lee, Y.J. Information Design of Smart Car Navigation based on Driving
Context. In Proceedings of the 61th Transactions of the Korean Society of Automotive Engineers, Jeju, Korea,
19–21 May 2016.
27.
Park, K.B. A Study on the Type of Information Presentation for the Head Up Display in Passenger Vehicles.
Master’s Thesis, Korea University, Seoul, Korea, 2019. [CrossRef]
28.
Hong, S.P.; Kim, S.M.; Park, S.J.; Jung, E.S. A Study on Designing of a Menu Structure for the Instrument
Cluster IVIS using Taguchi Method. J. Ergon. Soc. Korea 2010, 29, 39–46. [CrossRef]
29.
Gu, B.R.; Ju, D.Y. Comparative Analysis of Requirements for Information Presentation on In-vehicle Display
Systems by Driving Career. Korean Soc. Automot. Eng. 2016, 24, 668–676. [CrossRef]
30.
Lee, Y.H.; Yoo, H.S.; Pan, Y.H. Content Guidelines for Multi-Display User Experience in Autonomous Vehicles.
J. Ergon. Soc. Korea 2017, 36. [CrossRef]
31.
Cho, Y. Augmented Reality (AR) Head-Up Display (HUD) Design Study for Prevention of Car Accident
Based on Graphical Design, Sensitivity and Conveyance of Meaning. Arch. Des. Res. 2015, 28, 103–117.
[CrossRef]
32.
Wu, H.; Shou, S. Automotive Cockpit Design 2020; Chalmers University of Technology Department of Product
and Production Engineering Division of Design and Human Factors: Göteborg, Sweden, 20 November 2011.


Electronics 2020, 9, 611
15 of 16
33.
DIN
EN
ISO
15008.
Straßenfahrzeuge—Ergonomische
Aspekte
von
Fahrerinformations
und
Assistenzsystemen—Anforderungen und Bewertungsmethoden der Visuellen Informationsdarstellung im Fahrzeug;
DIN Deutsches Institut für Normung: Berlin, Germany, 2009.
34.
Wierwille, W.W.; Casali, J.G. A validated rating scale for global mental workload measurement applications.
In Proceedings of the 27th Human Factors Society Annual Meeting, 10–14 October 1983; Sage Publications:
Norfolk, Virginia, USA; Volume 27, pp. 129–133. [CrossRef]
35.
Riener, A.; Kun, A.L.; Gabbard, J.; Brewster, S.; Riegler, A. ARV 2018: 2nd Workshop on Augmented
Reality for Intelligent Vehicles. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Automotive User
Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications—AutomotiveUI, Toronto, ON, Canada, 23–26 September
2018; Volume 18, pp. 30–36. [CrossRef]
36.
Tufano, D.R. Automotive HUDs: The Overlooked Safety Issues. Hum. Factors 1997, 39, 303–311. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
37.
Nicholas, J. Ward, Andrew Parkes, Head-up displays and their automotive application: An overview of
human factors issues aﬀecting safety. Accid. Anal. Prev. 1994, 26, 703–717.
38.
Gish, K.W.; Staplin, L. Human Factors Aspects of Using Head UP Displays in Automobiles: A Review of the
Literature; DOT HS 808 320; NHTSA: Washington, DC, USA, 1995.
39.
Kun, A.L.; Tscheligi, M.; Riener, A.; van der Meulen, H. ARV 2017: Workshop on Augmented Reality for
Intelligent Vehicles. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and
Interactive Vehicular Applications Adjunct—AutomotiveUI 2017, Oldenburg, Germany, 24–27 September
2017; Volume 75, pp. 47–51. [CrossRef]
40.
Jesus, V.; Gilberto, O.-G. Methodology for the design of automotive HUD graphical interfaces. DYNA 2018,
85, 161–167. [CrossRef]
41.
Park, J.; Cho, C.; Baek, S.; Park, W. Eﬀect of automotive head-up display (HUD) imagery location on driver
preference associated with use of scrolling list while driving. In Proceedings of the 19th Triennial Congress
of the International Ergonomics Association, Melbourne, Australia, 9–14 August 2015.
42.
Morita, K.; Sekine, M.; Tsukada, Y.; Okada, T.; Toyofuku, Y. Consideration on Appropriate Display Area for
Head-Up Displays; SAE Technical Paper No. 2007-01-3512; SAE: Warrendale, PA, USA, 2007. [CrossRef]
43.
Weintraub, D.J.; Haines, R.F.; Randle, R.J. Head-up display (HUD) utility, II: Runway to HUD transitions
monitoring eye focus and decision times. In Proceedings of the 29th Human Factors Society Annual Meeting,
Baltimore, MD, USA, 29 September–3 October 1985; SAGE Publications: Thousand Oaks, CA, USA; Volume
29, pp. 615–619. [CrossRef]
44.
Wittmann, M.; Kiss, M.; Gugg, P.; Steﬀen, A.; Fink, M.; Pöppel, E.; Kamiya, H. Eﬀects of display position of a
visual in-vehicle task on simulated driving. Appl. Ergon. 2006, 37, 187–199. [CrossRef]
45.
Nunes, A.; Wickens, C.; Yin, S. Examining the viability of the Neisser search model in the ﬂight domain and
the beneﬁts of highlighting in visual search. In Proceedings of the 50th Human Factors and Ergonomics
Society Annual Meeting, San Francisco, CA, USA, 16–20 October 2006; Sage Publications: Thousand Oaks,
CA, USA; Volume 50, pp. 35–39. [CrossRef]
46.
Remington, R.W.; Johnston, J.C.; Ruthruﬀ, E.; Gold, M.; Romera, M. Visual search in complex displays:
Factors aﬀecting conﬂict detection by air traﬃc controllers. Hum. Factors 2000, 42, 349–366. [CrossRef]
47.
Donkor, G.E. Evaluating the impact of Head-Up Display complexity on peripheral detection performance:
A driving simulator study. Adv. Transp. Stud. 2012, 28, 5–16.
48.
Plavšic, M.; Duschl, M.; Tönnis, M.; Bubb, H.; Klinker, G. Ergonomic design and evaluation of augmented
reality based cautionary warnings for driving assistance in urban environments. Proc. Int. Ergon. Assoc. 2009.
49.
Tonnis, M.; Klinker, G. Eﬀective control of a car driver’s attention for visual and acoustic guidance towards
the direction of imminent dangers. In Proceedings of the 2006 IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Mixed and Augmented Reality, Santa Barbard, CA, USA, 22–25 October 2006; pp. 13–22. [CrossRef]
50.
Doshi, A.; Cheng, S.Y.; Trivedi, M.M. A novel active heads-up display for driver assistance. IEEE Trans. Syst.
Man Cybern. Part B Cybern. 2008, 39, 85–93. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.
Haeuslschmid, R.; Shou, Y.; O’Donovan, J.; Burnett, G.; Butz, A. First steps towards a view management
concept for large-sized head-up displays with continuous depth. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications, Ann Arbor, MI, USA,
24–26 October 2016; pp; pp. 1–8. [CrossRef]


Electronics 2020, 9, 611
16 of 16
52.
Liu, Y.C. Eﬀects of using head-up display in automobile context on attention demand and driving performance.
Displays 2003, 24, 157–165. [CrossRef]
53.
Wang, C.W.; Jung, H.Y.; Na, Y.J.; Min, S.D. Analysis of Brain activity quotient change of HUD location and
Color. In Proceedings of the 46th Journal of Korean Institute of Electrical Engineers, Muju, Jeonbuk, Korea,
15–17 July 2015.
54.
Betancur, J.A. Physical Variable Analysis Involved in Head-Up Display Systems Applied to Automobiles.
In Augmented Reality-Some Emerging Application Areas; InTech. ISO: Romana, Croatia, 2011; p. 690. [CrossRef]
55.
Kim, M.J.; Pan, Y.H. A Study on the relationship between cognitive level and size according to the importance
of vehicle Head-Up Display channeled information. J. Korea Des. Knowl. 2015, 33, 163–170.
56.
Klauer, S.G.; Dingus, T.A.; Neale, V.L.; Sudweeks, J.D.; Ramsey, D.J. The Impact of Driver Inattention on
Near-Crash/Crash Risk: An Analysis Using the 100-Car Naturalistic Driving Study Data; National Highway Traﬃc
Safety Administration: Washington, DC, USA, 2006.
57.
Ulahannan, A.; Cain, R.; Thompson, S.; Skrypchuk, L.; Mouzakitis, A.; Jennings, P.; Birrell, S. User expectations
of partial driving automation capabilities and their eﬀect on information design preferences in the vehicle.
Appl. Ergon. 2020, 82. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.
Ulahannan, A.; Jennings, P.; Oliveira, L.; Birrell, S. Designing an Adaptive Interface: Using Eye Tracking to
Classify How Information Usage Changes over Time in Partially Automated Vehicles. IEEE Access 2020,
8, 16865–16875. [CrossRef]
© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).


