Augmented Reality vs. Street Views: A Driving Simulator 
Study Comparing Two Emerging Navigation Aids
Zeljko Medenica 
University of New 
Hampshire 
Durham, NH, USA 
zeljko.medenica@unh.edu 
Andrew L. Kun 
University of New 
Hampshire 
Durham, NH, USA 
andrew.kun@unh.edu 
Tim Paek 
Microsoft Research 
Redmond, WA, USA 
timpaek@microsoft.com 
 
Oskar Palinko 
University of New 
Hampshire 
Durham, NH, USA 
oskar.palinko@unh.edu 
 
ABSTRACT 
Prior research has shown that when drivers look away from 
the road to view a personal navigation device (PND), 
driving performance is affected. To keep visual attention on 
the road, an augmented reality (AR) PND using a heads-up 
display could overlay a navigation route. In this paper, we 
compare the AR PND, a technology that does not currently 
exist but can be simulated, with two PND technologies that 
are popular today: an egocentric street view PND and the 
standard map-based PND. Using a high-fidelity driving 
simulator, we examine the effect of all three PNDs on 
driving performance in a city traffic environment where 
constant, alert attention is required. Based on both objective 
and subjective measures, experimental results show that the 
AR PND exhibits the least negative impact on driving. We 
discuss the implications of these findings on PND design as 
well as methods for potential improvement. 
Author Keywords 
Driving simulation, Augmented reality, Navigation. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.  
General Terms 
Measurement, Design, Performance, Experimentation, 
Human Factors. 
INTRODUCTION 
In some countries driving is the primary mode of 
commuting. For example, according to the U.S. Census 
Bureau [12], Americans spend more than 100 hours a year 
commuting to work. Given the large amount of time that 
many people spend behind the wheel, and the increasing 
availability of computational resources that can now 
operate inside a vehicle, companies have been introducing 
myriad mobile services and functionalities into the 
consumer market just for drivers. A few notable examples 
are hands-free voice dialing, live traffic reports, automated 
directory assistance, infotainment systems, and personal 
navigation devices (PNDs). Unfortunately, the question of 
how these in-car services impact driving performance is 
often left unanswered. The focus of this paper is the impact 
of PNDs on visual attention and driving performance. 
In recent work, Kun et al. explored the effects of two PNDs 
on visual attention and driving performance [9]. One was a 
standard PND that displays a map and provides turn-by-turn 
instructions by voice. The other was a PND that only uses 
voice instructions. They found that participants spent more 
time looking at the road ahead with the voice-only PND, 
which in turn translated into better driving performance. 
Nevertheless, participants preferred the standard PND. So, 
how can a PND allow drivers to maintain high visual 
attention on the road for good driving but also generate high 
user satisfaction? We believe that this can be accomplished 
with augmented reality (AR) personal navigation devices.  
AR PNDs integrate a virtual navigation route into the real-
world scene by displaying it directly on the windshield with 
a head-up-display (HUD). No glancing towards an in-car 
display is required. Previous research has indicated that 
HUDs have safety benefits such as shorter reaction time to 
sudden events [16] in comparison to head-down displays 
(HDDs), which are today’s standard.  
With advances in HUD technology and location services, 
we expect that AR PNDs will soon be commercially 
available. However, what is available to consumers now are 
HDD-based solutions that incorporate elements of AR 
technology. One such solution is the egocentric street view 
(SV) PND. SV PNDs use sequences of still images of the 
road and surrounding streets, augmented with a virtual 
navigation route, to help users orient themselves with 
respect to visual landmarks. While this kind of AR can be 
beneficial for pedestrians or passenger-side navigators, it is 
unclear whether an SV PND is appropriate for drivers. In 
contrast to AR PNDs, SV PNDs do not overlay information 
on the real world, but rather use sequences of pictures of the 
real world taken at a prior time; hence, driving performance 
may be affected by the process of resolving differences 
between the real world and images displayed by the PND. 
Furthermore, since commercially available SV PNDs, such 
as Google Maps Navigation with Street View [3], operate 
on a HDD, the AR benefits may be offset by the need to 
look at the display. 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee. 
MobileHCI 2011, Aug 30–Sept 2, 2011, Stockholm, Sweden. 
Copyright 2011 ACM  978-1-4503-0541-9/11/08-09....$10.00.
265


 
In this paper, our goal is to explore the impact of AR and 
SV PNDs on visual attention, driving performance and user 
satisfaction. We include a standard PND in this study as a 
baseline. We focus our exploration on city roads because 
that is where drivers’ interactions with PNDs are most 
likely to be challenging. With unknown city roads, drivers 
have to make timely decisions about turns while heeding 
both pedestrians and traffic. In pursuit of our goal we 
propose three hypotheses. 
1. With standard PNDs as a baseline, AR PN Ds allow 
drivers to spend more time looking at the road ahead 
than SV PNDs. Previous work by Kun et al. [9] indicates 
that following voice-only turn-by-turn instructions allows 
drivers to spend about 6.5% more time looking at the 
road ahead than using a standard map-based PND with 
the same voice instructions. Similarly, AR PNDs will, by 
design, allow drivers to keep their eyes on the road. 
However, we expect that with SV PNDs drivers will need 
to resolve differences between the real world and PND 
images and will thus spend even more time looking at the 
PND display than with the standard PND.  
2. The differences in visual attention between the PNDs are 
associated with differences in driving performance, with 
AR PNDs allowing for the best driving performance. 
Given that AR PNDs allow drivers to keep their eyes on 
the road, we expect that these PNDs will allow for better 
driving performance than standard and SV PNDs. Again, 
as we expect SV PNDs to incur the highest cost in visual 
attention, we expect them to exhibit worse driving 
performance than even standard PNDs. 
3. When comparing different characteristics of AR and SV 
PNDs, users will express a p reference for AR PN Ds. 
Even if our experiment indicates that AR PNDs are 
superior to SV PNDs in terms of visual attention and 
driving performance, will users prefer them? For 
example, in the experiment of Kun et al., using the voice-
only PND resulted in better visual attention and driving 
performance, but users preferred to see maps along with 
hearing voice instructions. We expect that users will 
actually prefer AR PNDs. 
The structure of this paper is as follows. First, we survey 
related research and describe the experiment we conducted 
to evaluate the three hypotheses above using a high fidelity 
driving simulator. Next, we report our findings and discuss 
their implications on PND design in general. Finally, we 
conclude with directions for future research. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
Driving performance is often characterized using the 
averages of performance over multiple, relatively long, road 
segments. However, as pointed out by Kun et al. [9], such 
averages can miss short, consistent sequences where 
engaging in some secondary action while driving is 
followed by increased variance in driving performance 
measures. Kun et al. detected cross-correlation peaks 
between a sequence representing glances away from the 
road ahead and sequences representing the variance of lane 
position and steering wheel angle, where the variances were 
calculated over a 1 second-long sliding window. These 
peaks indicate that an increase in lane position and steering 
wheel variance followed reduced attention to the road 
ahead. Kun et al. also found that as the percent time spent 
looking at a PND increases, the magnitude of the peaks also 
increases. In light of this prior research, we propose testing 
our second hypothesis using the cross-correlation technique 
used by Kun et al. 
Since displaying navigation instructions using AR and SV 
PNDs is accomplished using HUD and HDD displays, 
respectively, it is worth exploring how the two presentation 
techniques compare with respect to their influence on visual 
attention, driver safety and driving performance. A plethora 
of research covers these topics. Besides [16] mentioned in 
the introduction, the experiment performed by Liu [11] 
offers additional evidence that HUDs may provide safety 
benefits; in a driving simulator study, the author found that 
when using a HUD, drivers tend to respond faster to 
unexpected road events for both low and high workload 
conditions. These conclusions were corroborated by Horrey 
et al. (2003) [6], in which HDDs were associated with 
decreased performance, as reflected in e.g. slower reactions 
to hazardous events and side (secondary) tasks. The authors 
suggest that hazard detection mostly requires focal vision, 
whereas vehicle control relies on ambient vision. Thus, 
when drivers direct their focal vision at HDDs, their 
ambient vision-supported vehicle control does not suffer, 
though their focal vision-dependent hazard detection does. 
Even though HUDs can provide safety benefits, practically 
all commercially available PNDs rely on a map displayed 
on a HDD with a navigation route overlaid on top of it. The 
fact that a screen is present entices drivers to steal glances 
at it and away from the road ahead [9]. This is a problem. 
As demonstrated in a driving simulator experiment by 
Horrey et al. (2006) [7], who explored the effect of 
interacting with in-car devices on driving performance and 
visual attention, as users spent less time looking at the road 
ahead, their lane position variability increased. 
In-car HUDs leveraging AR navigation still need to 
overcome technical challenges before they hit the consumer 
market. That does not prohibit, however, researchers today 
from investigating tomorrow’s AR navigation technology in 
HUDs. Burnett found that HUD-based navigation devices 
can help reduce navigational errors compared to HDD-
based devices [1]. More recently, in a driving simulator 
study, Kim and Dey [8] presented users with a full 
windshield HUD which overlays directions on the road and 
also depicts a map of the surrounding area which rises from 
the road ahead on a plane perpendicular to the driver’s eye-
gaze. The intention was to provide drivers with both local 
route guidance and global awareness of the road network, 
while keeping their eyes fixed on the road. Consistent with 
our hypothesis that AR PNDs allow drivers to spend more 
time on the road ahead, Kim and Dey found that for older 
266


drivers, their approach reduces the effect of divided 
attention and improves driving in comparison to standard 
PNDs. 
In addition to navigation, in-car AR techniques can be 
valuable for accomplishing other important tasks, such as 
alerting drivers to road hazards. Strayer and Johnston [17] 
used an AR-based 3D arrow displayed on a HUD to direct a 
driver’s attention to imminent danger. In simulator-based 
experiments, 
this 
approach 
outperformed 
using 
an 
exocentric, bird’s-eye schematic of the car with an arrow 
indicating the direction of the source of danger. Fröhlich et 
al. explored using an AR HDD for navigational and urgent 
tasks [2]. They found that the AR HDD had a positive 
impact on user-perceived safety for urgent tasks.  
EXPERIMENT 
We now describe our experimental setup and procedure. 
We also detail each of the three PNDs that were used in our 
study as well as how we computed the dependent variables. 
Equipment 
The experiment was performed in a high-fidelity driving 
simulator (Figure 1) with a 180° field of view screen and a 
full-width automobile cab. The cab sits on top of a motion 
base which simulates car movements for braking and 
accelerating as well as bumps on the road. As shown in 
Figure 2, the simulator was equipped with two eye-trackers 
which track subjects’ gaze and head position using two 
pairs of cameras mounted on the dashboard. Figure 2 also 
shows the location of the in-car LCD screen which was 
used as the display for the standard PND and the SV PND. 
The LCD screen was placed on top of the dashboard, which 
is a common place for contemporary PNDs and smart 
phones with navigation capabilities. The size of the LCD 
screen was 3.5 inches (about 9 cm) diagonally which falls 
within the typical size of commercially available navigation 
devices. 
Method 
Participants 
Eighteen university students participated in the experiment. 
They were between 18 and 37 years of age (mean age 20.5 
years, standard deviation 4.7 years). As compensation each 
received a $20 gift card to a popular store chain. 
Navigation Aids 
Each participant performed navigation with each of the 
following three PNDs: 
1. Augmented reality PND (AR PND) : Our AR PND 
overlays a translucent navigation route on the real world 
scene. We presented navigation directions using a narrow 
semi-transparent surface which was suspended above the 
center of the road at a height of about 2 meters. This created 
the visual effect of a navigation route hovering above the 
vehicle, similar to the Virtual CableTM [20]. In our driving 
simulator, the route is projected onto simulator screens, as 
shown in Figure 3, instead of a windshield HUD, which is 
unavailable. 
2. Street View PND (SV PND) : The egocentric street view 
PND utilizes the LCD to display a sequence of images of 
the world from the driver’s perspective. This sequence is 
augmented with a translucent navigation route (Figure 4). 
The navigation route was displayed using a wide, 
transparent, road level surface, as shown in Figure 4. We 
used this road-level surface because of its similarity to 
commercially available HDD-based PNDs (e.g. [3]). 
Simulating the SV PND required having a stream of images 
of the surrounding environment. This stream was generated 
by a driving simulator running in parallel with the one that 
was operated by our participants. An SV PND uses images 
of the world taken at some earlier point in time, and this 
was faithfully represented in our experiment. Specifically, 
fixed entities (roads, buildings, etc.) were the same in both 
simulations, while parked and moving vehicles and 
Figure 1. 180º field of view driving simulator. 
 
Figure 2. Experimental setup inside the vehicle. 
 
Figure 3. AR PND from the driver’s perspective. 
 
Figure 4. LCD screen displaying SV PND. 
267


 
pedestrians were different. The SV PND displayed a new 
image every 15 meters, which is the distance at which 
images are also taken for Google Street View [4] in a city 
environment. Thus, participants experienced an SV PND 
similar to Google Maps Navigation, which uses Google 
Street View data. Note that the season, the weather and the 
time of day were identical in our two simulations. In real-
life scenarios, these variables can be quite different between 
the outside world and Google Street View data. 
3. Standard PND (SPND): Similar to the most basic 
commercially available PNDs, our LCD screen (Figure 5) 
presented users with a real-time map of the surrounding 
environment as well as the position of the vehicle in a 
simulated world. We used the same LCD for both SV and 
SPND. The 2D map was presented in a dynamic, 
exocentric, forward-up view. The car (represented by a 
small triangle on the map) always remained in the center of 
the screen, while the road moved about it. Note that our 
baseline of using the 2D map may be more difficult than the 
3D angular map utilized by many PNDs today since 
transforming a 2D map into 3D has been shown to require 
mental effort [15].  
Since most commercially available PNDs ship with spoken 
directions enabled, for our experiment all three PNDs also 
utilized identical turn-by-turn spoken directions. In order to 
eliminate potential problems with comprehension of 
synthesized speech (e.g., Lai et al. [10]), we used pre-
recorded voice directions by a female voice talent. 
Procedure 
After filling out the consent forms and personal information 
questionnaires, participants were given an overview of the 
driving simulator and descriptions of the three navigation 
conditions. Next, they proceeded to complete three 
navigation experiments, one with each of the PNDs. Before 
each condition, we provided subjects with about 5 minutes 
of training using that PND. For training, users followed 
PND navigation instructions in a city environment. In order 
to circumvent order effects, we counterbalanced the 
presentation order of the PNDs between subjects. 
As shown in Figure 6, subjects drove on two lane city roads 
which included ambient vehicles, moving pedestrians, 
traffic signs and lane markings. Lanes were 3.6 meters 
wide. Subjects were instructed to drive as they normally 
would in real life and to obey all traffic laws. They were 
also instructed (and trained) to pay attention to unexpected 
events, such as pedestrians emerging from behind parked 
vehicles (Figure 6) or vehicles braking suddenly. These 
unexpected events are not uncommon in city driving. 
Furthermore, the ability to avoid collisions when such 
unexpected events occur is a valuable measure of driving 
performance. 
For all three PNDs, the participants drove a different route 
with two unexpected events in each case. Figure 7 shows 
the first route used in this experiment. For the second route 
we reversed the direction of travel, and the third route was 
the mirror image of the first route. In short, all three routes 
were of the same length (about 10 km) and complexity. 
However, the turn-by-turn directions for each route were 
different. Thus, there was no risk of subjects remembering 
navigation instructions from the previous route. Each route 
had both long (400 and 800 meter long) and short (200 
meter long) segments with many intersections on the given 
path. On average it took about 15 minutes to traverse a 
route. The presentation order of routes was the same for all 
subjects. 
After each PND condition, subjects filled out a NASA-TLX 
questionnaire. Finally, at the end of the experiment, 
subjects ranked their level of agreement with various 
statements pertaining to the PNDs and provided written and 
verbal feedback about the experiment. 
 
Figure 5. LCD screen displaying SPND. 
 
Figure 6. Simulated two-lane city road. The environment 
included ambient traffic and unexpected events, such as this 
pedestrian emerging from behind a parked vehicle. 
 
Figure 7. One virtual route navigated by subjects and the 
short segments included in the analysis. The other two routes 
were created by travel direction reversal and mirroring. 
268


Design 
We chose a within-subjects factorial design experiment 
with PND type, Nav, as our independent variable. 
We considered conducting a 2x2 study with the display 
type (HUD or HDD) and the type of navigation instructions 
(AR or SV) as the independent variables. This would have 
allowed us to directly compare the effects of the 
independent variables and investigate their interaction. 
However, such a 2x2 study would have included two 
confounding factors, both related to visual attention. First, 
HUD SV PNDs would have required drivers to focus on a 
portion of the windshield in order to view navigation 
instructions. Unfortunately, that shift of focus away from 
the road would have made HUD and HDD SV PNDs too 
similar. Second, HDD AR PNDs introduce the possibility 
of driving exclusively using the live feed on the HDD. This 
would have changed the way drivers use focal and ambient 
vision, making that condition markedly different from the 
others. Because we still wanted to compare differences in 
visual attention, we decided to focus on HUD AR and HDD 
SV PNDs as holistic conditions, using SPNDs as a baseline.  
We measured multiple dependent variables: 
• Percent dwell time (PDT)  on the road ahead, which 
measures the percent of time drivers spend looking at the 
road ahead. A low value indicates that a driver is 
distracted, which in turn can lead to collisions. 
• Cross-correlation peaks to detect short periods of 
deterioration in driving performance following glances 
away from the road. The existence of statistically 
significant peaks indicates that such deteriorations do 
indeed follow reduced visual attention to the road [9]. 
The larger the size of a peak, the larger and/or more 
frequent the deteriorations.  
• Average driving performance measures, which included 
the absolute values of first difference and variances of 
lane position, steering wheel angle and velocity. The 
absolute value of first difference (AVFD) is defined as: 
 
𝐴𝑉𝐹𝐷{𝑥[𝑛]} = |𝑥[𝑛] −𝑥[𝑛−1]| 
Equation 1. Absolute value of first difference. 
where x[n] is a discrete time sequence and n is an integer. 
In each case, higher values for driving performance 
measures indicate deterioration. We also evaluated mean 
velocity. A low mean velocity for a portion of the road 
may indicate that the driver was concerned about safety 
or was otherwise distracted. 
• Number of collisions is a rather coarse measure of driving 
performance, which represents the number of times that 
the subjects came into contact with another car or a 
pedestrian while driving. A collision is more likely to 
happen when the driver is confronted with unexpected 
events. However, it is important to note that our 
unexpected events were specifically designed to be 
avoidable by an alert driver. Hence, if a collision occurs, 
it is most likely due to driver distraction. 
• NASA-TLX score [5], which measures subjective opinion 
about the perceived cognitive workload while using each 
of the three navigation devices. 
• Level of agree ment with preferential statements, which 
reflects subjective opinion about PNDs, was collected 
using a 5-point Likert scale. 
Measurement 
Using an eye-tracker we were able to automatically classify 
gazes as being directed at the road ahead, at the LCD, or 
somewhere else inside the cabin (e.g. the speedometer). The 
sampling frequency of the eye-tracker was 60 Hz. In rare 
occasions when the eye-tracker was not able to resolve 
where the subject was directing his/her gaze, the 
experimenter made classifications using video footage from 
a camcorder installed on the dashboard. 
Lane position, steering wheel angle, vehicle speed and 
collisions with other entities in the simulation were 
recorded by our driving simulator software at a frequency 
of 10 Hz.  
Calculation 
Data segmentation: The city routes in our experiment can 
be broken up into segments by treating roads between two 
intersections as separate segments. We calculated the PDT 
and all of our driving performance results (except the 
number of collisions), such as the absolute value of first 
difference and mean velocity, using data from 13 short 
segments (dashed lines in Figure 7).  
All 13 short segments had the same characteristics, thereby 
controlling factors that could potentially confound our 
results. In particular, the segments were 200 meters long 
measured from the centers of the adjacent intersections. 
Furthermore, at both the beginning and end of each 
segment, there was a four-way intersection where 
participants made either a right or left turn. Finally, 
participants did not encounter any unexpected events 
(represented by 1 and 2 in Figure 7) in the 13 segments we 
used to analyze visual attention and driving performance. 
Unexpected events often require sudden braking and 
steering wheel motion, which in turn can result in very 
large first differences and variances for these measures, 
making comparisons with other segments difficult. For the 
purpose of counting the number of collisions only, we used 
15 short segments, including the ones with unexpected 
events, since collisions are more likely to occur there.  
In analyzing all of the segments, we excluded data collected 
over the first 60 meters and the final 40 meters of a 
segment, and analyzed data generated over (200–60–40) = 
100 meters. This was done because driving performance is 
different between the excluded and analyzed portions of the 
segments. For example, at the beginning of a segment, 
drivers are completing the turning maneuver that is 
necessary to get through the previous intersection. And at 
the end of a segment, they are decelerating before entering 
the next intersection. Thus, the resulting first differences 
and variances can be much larger than those encountered 
269


 
away from intersections, which makes it difficult to 
compare excluded and analyzed portions of segments. 
Using the aforementioned short segments, we calculated the 
following measures. 
Visual attention: For each participant p and navigation aid 
nav, we calculated the average percent dwell time, PDTp,nav, 
on the road ahead by finding the ratio of the sum of dwell 
times for all 13 segments and the sum of the total time spent 
traversing all 13 segments. We defined “looking at the road 
ahead” as looking at one of the three projection screens of 
the simulator. Similarly, we calculated the percent dwell 
time on the LCD screen when participants used the SV and 
SPND. Finally, we calculated the percent dwell time on the 
rest of the cabin (speedometer, rear view mirror, etc.). 
Cross-correlation: We estimated the cross-correlation 
between the eye-gaze vector (EGV) and two driving 
performance vectors (DPV). EGV is a sequence of 0s and 
1s, where 1s represent moments when the driver’s gaze 
returns to the road ahead (e.g. from the LCD). The two 
DPVs are the absolute values of first difference (defined in 
Equation 1) for lane position and steering wheel angle. 
Before calculating the EGV and cross-correlations, we 
brought both correlates to the same sampling frequency. 
Since the sampling frequency was 60 Hz for the eye-tracker 
and 10 Hz for the simulator we down-sampled the eye-
tracker signal to 10 Hz. Thus, cross-correlation peaks (if 
any) are located at lag values that are integer multiples of 
100 milliseconds (1/10Hz). 
For each navigation aid nav, 𝑅𝑙𝑝௡௔௩[𝑙𝑎𝑔] is the cross-
correlation between EGV and 𝐷𝑃𝑉௟௣ for lane position. For 
each PND 𝑅𝑙𝑝௡௔௩[𝑙𝑎𝑔] was calculated as the average of 
cross-correlations for each of the 13 segments and each of 
the 18 participants. Similarly, 𝑅𝑠𝑤௡௔௩[𝑙𝑎𝑔] is the cross-
correlation between EGV and 𝐷𝑃𝑉௦௪ for steering wheel 
angle and was calculated analogously to 𝑅𝑙𝑝௡௔௩[𝑙𝑎𝑔]. The 
lag variable indicates how much the change in driving 
performance measure lags behind the return of the gaze to 
the road ahead. Thus, any peaks in the cross-correlation 
functions might represent drivers’ corrective actions taken 
when their attention returns back to the road ahead. 
Average driving performance measures: For each 
participant, segment and navigation type we calculated the 
average absolute values of first differences and the 
variances of the following three driving performance 
measures: lane position, steering wheel angle and velocity. 
We also calculated the average velocity for each segment. 
For each participant and navigation aid we then calculated 
the averages for these variables over 13 segments. 
Number of collisions: We reviewed the simulator log files 
for collisions between the participants’ vehicle and 
surrounding objects.  
Subjective 
assessment: 
NASA-TLX 
scores 
were 
calculated using NASA TLX for Windows [13]. Agreement 
levels with preferential statements and written comments 
were transcribed from paper forms. We also solicited 
qualitative verbal comments about the experiment from 
participants. 
RESULTS 
Visual Attention 
Table 1 shows the PDT on the road ahead, the LCD screen 
and the rest of the cabin for each PND type. We conducted 
a repeated measures ANOVA to assess the effect of 
different PNDs on visual attention using PDT on the road 
ahead as the dependent variable. The analysis revealed a 
significant main effect on PDT for Nav (F2,24=121.647, 
p < 0.0001). PDT for AR was the highest at 96.4%, while 
SPND and SV PND had 89.3% and 86.8%, respectively. 
Post-hoc comparisons indicated significant differences 
between AR and SPND (p<0.0001), AR and SV 
(p<0.0001), and SV and SPND (p=0.008). 
As hypothesized, PDT dropped significantly when 
participants used either of the HDDs. More interestingly, 
SV PND required more visual attention (as measured by 
PDT) than using the simple, 2D SPND. To corroborate this 
finding, we conducted a repeated measures ANOVA with 
PDT on the LCD as a dependent variable comparing SPND 
and SV PND. Again, we found a statistically significant 
difference (F1,12=23.091, p<0.0001) with average PDT on 
LCD being much higher for SV (9.86%) than SPND 
(7.42%). We also confirmed that PDT on the rest of the 
cabin was not significantly affected by PND type. In short, 
our results seem to indicate that resolving differences 
between SV PND images and the observed world takes 
time and effort.  
Driving Performance 
Cross-correlation 
With respect 
to 
cross-correlation, we 
observed 
a 
relationship between the eye-gaze vector and both lane 
position and steering wheel angle DPVs, as shown in the 
peaks of the two cross-correlation functions 𝑅𝑙𝑝௡௔௩[𝑙𝑎𝑔] 
and 𝑅𝑠𝑤௡௔௩[𝑙𝑎𝑔] in Figure 8.  
 
AR 
SV 
S 
p-value 
road 
96.4 
86.8 
89.3 
<0.0001 
LCD 
 
9.9 
7.4 
<0.0001 
cabin 
3.5 
3.2 
3.2 
0.788 
Table 1. Percent dwell time (PDT) on road, LCD and other 
parts of the cabin as a function of PND type. 
270


Following Kun et al. [9], we evaluated the statistical 
significance of these peaks by employing a randomization 
test inspired by Veit et al. [19]. The procedure operates as 
follows. When estimating cross-correlations, we employ 
EGV and DPV vectors from matching segments. In the case 
of a randomization test, we employ an EGV from one 
segment and a DPV from a different segment. Since an 
EGV and a DPV from different segments are not related, 
the resulting cross-correlation estimate represents a chance 
outcome. We repeated this procedure 1000 times, thus 
calculating 1000 chance cross-correlation values for each 
value 
of 
lag. 
To 
determine 
if 
𝑅𝑙𝑝௡௔௩[𝑙𝑎𝑔] 
(or 
𝑅𝑠𝑤௡௔௩[𝑙𝑎𝑔]) is statistically significant for a given value of 
lag, we assessed whether 𝑅𝑙𝑝௡௔௩[𝑙𝑎𝑔] (or 𝑅𝑠𝑤௡௔௩[𝑙𝑎𝑔])  is 
larger than the  (𝑝∙1000)௧௛-largest cross-correlation value 
generated using mismatched segments, where p is the 
desired significance level. For example, if p=0.01, 
𝑅𝑙𝑝௡௔௩[𝑙𝑎𝑔] (or 𝑅𝑠𝑤௡௔௩[𝑙𝑎𝑔]) is statistically significant if 
it is larger than the 10th–largest (0.01 ∙1000 = 10) cross-
correlation value as estimated using mismatched segments.  
As we can see in Figure 8 (top) there are statistically 
significant peaks in 𝑅𝑠𝑤௡௔௩[𝑙𝑎𝑔] for all three PNDs, at the 
p=0.01 level. The most prominent peaks appear at 0.6 sec 
for SV and SPND and at 0.8 sec for AR PND. These peaks 
indicate that on average, the periods of looking away from 
the road ahead are followed by a larger change in the 
steering wheel angle (possible corrective actions) than in 
usual circumstances. Note that there is also a significant 
peak for AR. Such peaks occur when participants cast 
occasional glances towards the speedometer, steering wheel 
or dashboard. Similarly, the bottom graph of Figure 8 
shows the most prominent peaks for 𝑅𝑙𝑝௡௔௩[𝑙𝑎𝑔] at 0.6 sec 
for SV PND and SPND and at 3.6 sec for AR PND.  
According to our results, glancing away from the road 
ahead does seem to influence driving performance for all 
three PNDs. We can also rank the size of the effect for the 
three PNDs by comparing the magnitudes of the cross-
correlations for the most prominent peaks. In Figure 8, we 
observe that the effect size is the smallest for the AR PND 
and the largest for the SV PND. The relatively large 
difference in effect size between AR PND, on the one hand, 
and SV and SPND on the other, might be attributed to the 
difference in display type: HUD for AR and HDD for SV 
and SPND. However, we also see that the SPND cross-
correlation peaks are consistently smaller than SV PND 
peaks. Again, this indicates that resolving differences 
between SV PND images and the observed world may be 
cognitively taxing (certainly time consuming), even more 
so than receiving navigation instructions from a 2D map. 
Average Driving Performance Measures 
We conducted a repeated measures ANOVA to assess the 
effect of different PNDs on each of the average driving 
performance measures. As hypothesized, based on [9], we 
found no significant difference between the three PNDs 
regarding any of the average driving performance measures. 
As in [9], averaging performance measures over entire 
segments hides the immediate effects of glancing away 
from the road. However, these effects are evident in our 
cross-correlation analysis. 
Collisions 
There were no collisions with pedestrians or ambient traffic 
for any PND on segments without unexpected events. There 
were 8 collisions with vehicles on segments with 
unexpected events: 2 for AR, 3 for SV and 3 for SPND. 
Clearly, the occurrence of collisions did not depend on the 
PND type.  
Subjective Assessment 
NASA-TLX 
Users' average NASA-TLX ratings were 28.7, 38.7 and 
33.4 for the AR, SV and SPND, respectively. We 
performed a one-way ANOVA to examine the effect of 
PND on these subjective workload ratings. Our analysis 
revealed a significant main effect of Nav on workload 
(F2,24=6.759, p<0.005). Post-hoc comparisons indicated that 
subjects experienced less load using the AR than the SV 
PND (p<0.0001).  
 
 
Figure 8. Cross-correlation between eye-gaze vector (EGV) 
and driving performance vector (DPV) for steering wheel 
angle (top) and lane position (bottom). Circled peaks are 
statistically significant at the p=0.01 level. 
271


 
Preferential Statements 
Table 2 shows the percent of participants who agreed 
(white cells) or disagreed (shaded cells) with two 
preferential statements. Note that the percentages do not 
always sum up to 100% since some subjects were 
undecided. For each statement we performed a Friedman 
non-parametric test with respect to Nav.  
Table 2 shows a significant main effect on the subjective 
judgment about best driving performance (p=0.014). 
Participants ranked AR PND very highly (72% highly 
agreed or agreed) in comparison to others, while both SV 
and SPND were perceived as detrimental to driving (61% 
and 50% disagreed or highly disagreed, respectively). 
Using the Wilcoxon Signed Rank test for pairwise 
comparisons, we found significant differences between AR 
and SPND (p=0.027) and AR and SV (p=0.003). Clearly, 
most participants felt that the AR PND allowed for the best 
driving performance. 
Responses to the second preferential statement in Table 2 
indicate that subjects liked the AR PND. Using the 
Wilcoxon Signed Rank test, we found that participants 
significantly preferred the AR PND to both the SV 
(p=0.007) and SPND (p=0.045) and that participants 
significantly preferred the SPND over the SV PND 
(p=0.038). 
Written and Verbal Comments 
AR PND: Ten of the 18 participants (P) provided either 
written or verbal feedback indicating a preference for the 
AR PND over the other two PNDs. Quote 1 (Q1) of a 
written comment by participant 6 shows that P6 found the 
AR PND easy to use, presumably because it did not result 
in high cognitive load. 
Q1 (P6): “The windshield cable system [AR PND] was the 
easiest to use, and least obtrusive. … very intuitive to use.” 
On the other hand, two participants explicitly indicated (in 
verbal comments) that they liked the AR PND the least 
because the PND was always present in their field of vision. 
SV PND: While four participants mentioned liking the SV 
PND, none singled it out as the best of the three PNDs. 
However, fully ten participants reported disliking the SV 
PND, with P1 calling it “horrible.” P15 felt there was “too 
much going on” when using the SV PND. Even more 
interestingly P10 and P16 indicated that images in the SV 
PND did not correspond well to the (simulated) real world. 
Q2 (P10): “The cars in it [SV PND] were different than the 
real ones and so that was distracting.” 
Q3 (P16): “The 3D display did not relate well mentally to 
the on-road task and is less  preferred t han even t he 2D 
GPS display.” 
SPND: Six participants reported liking the SPND. No 
participants explicitly indicated disliking it, although two 
said they did not like having to look at the two HDD-based 
PNDs. Three liked that the SPND provided information 
beyond the upcoming turn. 
Spoken instructions: Four participants explicitly reported 
liking spoken instructions. Three (P1, P10 and P14) 
reported relying on spoken instructions and ignoring the 
visual information. Eye tracker data indicates that P10 and 
P14 had some success in ignoring the HDD PNDs and 
focusing on the road ahead. However, all three participants 
had the lowest PDT on the road ahead when using the SV 
PND and the highest when using the AR PND. 
DISCUSSION 
We started this study by proposing three hypotheses. We 
now consider each hypothesis in light of our results. 
1. With standard PNDs as a baseline, AR PN Ds allow 
drivers to spend more time looking at the road ahead 
than SV PNDs. 
Participants’ average percent dwell time (PDT) on the road 
ahead was highest for the AR PND (96.4%), followed by 
the SPND (89.3%) and the SV PND (86.8%). Clearly, the 
HUD-based AR PND allows users to keep their eyes on the 
road more than the HDD-based SPND and SV PND. This 
result was also supported by NASA TLX scores which 
showed that participants found the SV PND more difficult 
to use than the AR PND.  
The fact that we observed a difference in PDT between SV 
and SPND suggests that PDT is not solely a function of 
display modality. Rather, it is likely that participants found 
it difficult to resolve differences between the real world and 
SV images. This explanation is supported by the 
significantly more frequent glances at the display in the SV 
condition than with the SPND (19.1 and 15 on average per 
participant, respectively), despite no significant difference 
in mean glance durations between the two (0.47 sec and 
0.45 sec, respectively). Subjective assessments also support 
the explanation. In preferential statements, participants 
indicated that they preferred the SPND over the SV PND. 
Furthermore, ten participants indicated disliking the SV 
PND while only two indicated disliking both HDD-based 
PNDs. Finally, two participants specifically echoed our 
Statement 
Agreement 
AR 
SV 
SPND 
p ( χ²) 
My driving 
was best 
when using 
______ 
interface. 
highly 
agree or 
agree 
72.2 
11.1 
38.9 
0.014 
(8.49) 
highly 
disagree or 
disagree 
16.7 
61.1 
50 
I prefer to 
have a 
_____ for 
navigation. 
highly 
agree or 
agree 
66.7 
22.2 
38.9 
0.023 
(7.53) 
highly 
disagree or 
disagree 
16.7 
72.2 
27.8 
Table 2. Level of agreement with preferential statements.  
272


suggestion that resolving differences between real and SV 
PND images is difficult. 
2. The differences in visual attention between the PNDs are 
associated with differences in driving performance, with 
AR PNDs allowing for the best driving performance. 
We observed statistically significant correlations between 
returning the driver’s gaze to the road and changes in two 
driving performance measures: lane position and steering 
wheel angle. This suggests an association between glances 
directed away from the road and degradation of driving 
performance. Furthermore, ranking the amplitudes of 
prominent peaks in the cross-correlations for each PND we 
can see that AR PND consistently allows for the best 
driving performance, while using the SV PND results in the 
worst performance. Comparing peak magnitudes, SV PND 
appears to be even worse than our baseline SPND. 
However, ranking of amplitudes does not allow us to draw 
conclusions about how using the different PNDs relates to 
the risk of a collision. In fact, under our experimental 
conditions, we did not find any differences in the number of 
collisions for the three PNDs. 
3. When comparing different characteristics of AR and SV 
PNDs users will express a preference for AR PNDs. 
In evaluating preferential statements, our participants 
indicated that AR PND allowed for the best driving 
performance and that they preferred it to the other two 
PNDs. Furthermore, in written or verbal comments, ten of 
18 participants told us they preferred the AR PND over the 
other two PNDs. Only two participants indicated disliking 
the AR PND. The SV PND faired much worse, with four 
participants liking it but fully ten considering it to be the 
worst of the three PNDs.  
Design Implications 
Designing AR PNDs 
In order to keep drivers’ visual attention fully on the road, 
our results and the previous research literature suggest that 
interface designers consider one of two choices: AR PND 
and voice-only PND [9]. Only AR PND however offers 
visual confirmation that users are still on the right route. 
Furthermore, users expressed a preference for AR PND 
over SPND whereas in the study of Kun et al. [9] they 
expressed a preference for SPND over voice-only PND. 
While AR PND stands out as a safe and agreeable PND, our 
participants brought to our attention two concerns that merit 
further study. First, our implementation of an AR PND did 
not provide global navigation information; it only informs 
drivers about the current route to follow. Three participants 
in fact indicated they would have appreciated receiving 
information about upcoming turns. One approach to address 
this issue is that proposed by Kim and Dey [8]. Second, 
overlaying routes for long stretches of road may be 
distracting. Two participants stated that they disliked the 
elevated surface in the AR PND because it was always 
present in their peripheral vision. Showing AR directions 
only when a turn is coming may alleviate this problem.  
Designing SV PNDs 
Even though SV PNDs may look visually pleasing and 
efficient, our results indicate that using them might have a 
detrimental effect on visual attention and driving 
performance. SV PNDs may even require more visual 
attention than SPNDs, presumably because of the cognitive 
load of having to match the real world with SV images. 
Interface designers should exercise caution when taking the 
SV type of approach.  
One way that SV PNDs might be useful for navigation is 
when they are being used by a passenger. Is there a way to 
make SV PNDs act more like a co-present human navigator 
and less like a distracting visual display? Should SV PNDs 
add visual aids or special verbal instructions that help 
drivers understand the scene displayed on the PND? We 
suggest that exploring such questions, perhaps by learning 
from human navigator behaviors, might allow us to design 
better SV PNDs. 
CONCLUSION & FUTURE DIRECTION 
This paper presents a thorough driving simulator-based 
comparison of two novel PNDs, HUD AR and HDD SV, 
using a standard PND as a reference. Using a simulated city 
environment in a high fidelity driving simulator, we found 
that an AR PND provided for more visual attention at the 
road ahead as compared to both SV PND and SPND. On 
average, when using an AR PND, participants spent about 
5.7 sec and 4.2 sec more each minute looking at the road 
ahead in comparison to SV and SPND, respectively. 
Furthermore, we demonstrated how this increased visual 
attention was associated with better driving performance 
over both SV and SPNDs through peaks in cross-correlation 
functions. Importantly, participants’ subjective assessment 
of the AR PND was largely positive.  
SV PNDs use HDDs to show images of the world, which 
was associated with lower visual attention and worse 
driving performance. However, our results indicate that 
these effects are not solely due to using a HDD. After all, 
participants fared better with the HDD-based SPND. We 
suggest that a key issue is the difficulty in matching real 
world and SV images. Note that our real world and SV 
images were very similar, as the season, the weather and the 
time of day were identical in the two simulations that 
generated these images. In real-life scenarios these 
variables are likely to be different between the outside 
world and street view data. The effects of the differences on 
visual attention and driving performance are yet to be 
explored. 
Finally, the commercial availability of HDD AR PNDs for 
cars is imminent. Already in 2005 Narzt et al. reported on 
creating a prototype system, although they did not conduct 
controlled user studies to evaluate its effects on visual 
attention and driving performance [14]. And at least one 
downloadable mobile application promises to turn select 
273


 
mobile phones into HDD AR PNDs (Wikitude Drive [21]). 
These PNDs introduce the possibility of driving exclusively 
using a camera feed of the real world displayed on the 
HDD. As future research, we plan to explore how drivers 
would employ focal and ambient vision with such a PND, 
and how such visual behavior would relate to driving 
performance. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was supported by the US Department of Justice 
under grants 2006-DD-BX-K099, 2008-DN-BX-K221, 
2009-D1-BX-K021 and 2010-DD-BX-K226, and by 
Microsoft Research. 
REFERENCES 
1. Burnett, G. E. A Road-Based Evaluation of a Head-Up 
Display for Presenting Navigation Information. In Proc. 
HCI Int’l Conference (2003). 
2. Fröhlich, P., Schatz, R., Leitner, P., Mantler, S., and 
Baldauf, M. Evaluating realistic visualizations for 
safety-related in-car information systems. In Proc. CHI 
2010, ACM press (2010), 3847-3852. 
3. Google Maps Navigation. 
http://www.google.com/mobile/navigation/. 
4. Google Street View. http://maps.google.com/. 
5. Hart, S. G. and Staveland, L. E. Development of NASA-
TLX (Task Load Index): Results of Empirical and 
Theoretical Research. In Human Mental Workload. P. 
A. Hancock and N. Meshkati, Eds. North Holland Press 
(1988), 239-250. 
6. Horrey, W. J., Wickens, C. D., and Alexander, A. L. 
The Effects of Head-Up Display Clutter and In-Vehicle 
Display Separation on Concurrent Driving Performance. 
In Proc. HFES 47th Annual Meeting (2003). 
7. Horrey, W. J., Wickens, C. D., and Consalus, K. P. 
Modeling Drivers' Visual Attention Allocation while 
Interacting with In-Vehicle Technologies. Experimental 
Psychology: Applied 12, (2006), 67-78.  
8. Kim, S. and Dey, A. K. Simulated augmented reality 
windshield display as a cognitive mapping aid for elder 
driver navigation. In Proc. CHI 2009, ACM Press 
(2009), 133-142. 
9. Kun, A. L., Paek, T., Medenica, Ž., Memarović, N., and 
Palinko, O. Glancing at personal navigation devices can 
affect 
driving: 
experimental 
results 
and 
design 
implications. In Proc. AutomotiveUI '09, ACM Press 
(2009), 129-136. 
10. Lai, J., Cheng, K., Green, P., and Tsimhoni, O. On the 
Road and on the Web? Comprehension of synthetic and 
human speech while driving. In Proc. SIGCHI 2001, 
ACM Press (2001), 206-212. 
11. Liu, Y.C. Effects of using head-up display in automobile 
context on attention demand and driving performance. 
Displays 24, 4-5 (2003), 157-165. 
12. Lowe, S. Many Workers Have Long Commutes to 
Work. US Census Bureau Press Release. 
http://www.census.gov/Press-
Release/www/releases/archives/american_community_s
urvey_acs/004279.html. March 29, 2005. Retrieved 
5/30/2009. 
13. NASA TLX for Windows. 
http://humansystems.arc.nasa.gov/groups/TLX/compute
r.php. 
14. Narzt, W., Kolb, D., Muller, R., and Hortner, H. 
Pervasive Information Acquisition for Mobile AR-
Navigation Systems. In Proc. WMCSA 2003, IEEE 
Press (2003). 
15. Porathe, T. and Prison, J. 2008. Design of human-map 
system interaction. In Ext. Abstracts CHI 2008, ACM 
Press (2008). 
16. Steinfeld, A. and Green, P. Driver Responses to 
Navigation Information on Full-Windshield, Head-Up 
Displays. Int’l Journal of Vehicle Design 19, 2 (1998), 
135-149. 
17. Strayer, D. L. and Johnston, W. A. Driven to 
Distraction: Dual-Task Studies of Simulated Driving 
and Conversing on a Cellular Telephone. Psychological 
Science 12, 6 (2001), 462-466. 
18. Tönnis, M. and Klinker, G. 2006. Effective control of a 
car driver's attention for visual and acoustic guidance 
towards the direction of imminent dangers. In Proc. 
ISMAR 2006, IEEE Computer Society (2006), 13-22. 
19. Veit, R.R., Pyle, P., and McGowan, J.A. Ocean 
Warming and Long-Term Change in Pelagic Bird 
Abundance within the California Current System. 
Marine Ecology Progress Series, 139 (1996), 11-18. 
20.Virtual CableTM. http://www.mvs.net/. 
21. Wikitude Drive. http://www.wikitude.org/en/drive. 
 
274


