 
1
A Comparative Study of Simulated Augmented Reality 
Displays for Vehicle Navigation 
Richie Jose†     Gun A. Lee‡†     Mark Billinghurst‡ 
†The Human Interface Technology Laboratory New Zealand, University of Canterbury 
‡School of Information Technology & Mathematical Sciences, University of South Australia 
richiejk@outlook.com     gun.lee@unisa.edu.au     mark.billinghurst@unisa.edu.au 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper we report on a user study in a simulated 
environment that compares three types of Augmented 
Reality (AR) displays for assisting with car navigation: 
Heads Up Display (HUD), Head Mounted Display 
(HMD) and Heads Down Display (HDD). The virtual 
cues shown on each of the interface were the same, but 
there was a significant difference in driver behaviour and 
preference between interfaces. Overall, users performed 
better and preferred the HUD over the HDD, and the 
HMD was ranked lowest. These results have implications 
for people wanting to use AR cues for car navigation. 
Author Keywords 
Augmented Reality; Car Navigation, Head Up Display. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.2 User Interfaces; H.5.1 Multimedia Information 
Systems - Artificial, augmented, and virtual realities. 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper reports on research to compare different 
Augmented Reality (AR) displays for vehicle navigation. 
AR technology is usually considered to be a live view of 
the real world, onto which virtual information is 
superimposed, and can be interacted with (Kipper & 
Rampolla, 2012). One possible use of AR in cars is to 
provide navigation cues, such as virtual arrows (Tonnis et 
al., 2007), or lines on the road (Hu & Uchimura, 2004). 
There are a number of ways to implement an in-car AR 
navigation interface. One of the most common is by using 
a Head Down Display (HDD) mounted on the dashboard 
showing an AR enhanced live video view (see Figure 1 
top). This display shows AR cues on a live camera view 
of the real world. A common example of this is the use of 
in-car displays for parallel parking by using AR imagery 
with reverse cameras. The main advantage is that the 
display will not block the driver's view of the real world. 
However the driver does need to take his or her eyes off 
the road to view the display. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Simulated AR views (HDD, HUD, and HMD from 
top to bottom). 
Another approach is to project information onto a Heads 
Up Display (HUD) on the windscreen in the driver's line 
of sight (see Figure 1 middle). This reduces the time the 
driver needs to take their eyes off the road and provides a 
large field of view. However, there are a few challenges, 
such as the level of visibility in direct sunlight, and the 
obstruction of real world elements with the AR cues. 
Finally, the driver could wear a lightweight Head 
Mounted Display (HMD), such as Google Glass 
(http://glass.google.com), to create a personal virtual 
display overlaying the real world (see Figure 1 bottom). 
The main benefit of using a HMD is that the user can see 
navigation information regardless of where they are 
looking. However, the display may block or at least cover 
certain portion of the driver’s real world view. 
Since there are a number of different ways to show AR 
navigation cues in a car, it is important to research the 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
OzCHI '16, November 29-December 02, 2016, Launceston, TAS, 
Australia 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-4618-4/16/11…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3010915.3010918 


 
 
2
effect on driver behaviour of each of these options. Some 
of the existing research in using AR for in-car navigation 
compares using a HUD with an in-car HDD (Charissis et 
al., 2008; Liu & Wen, 2004). There is also research 
comparing using AR cues instead of map navigation 
(Yamaguchi et al., 2007). However, to the best of our 
knowledge, we are unaware of previous research that 
directly compares the same AR interface on a HMD, 
HUD and HDD for in-car navigation. Thus, the main 
contribution of this paper is to provide comparisons of 
HMD, HUD and HDD display technologies for AR 
navigation. 
Testing of AR navigation interfaces in real world driving 
conditions is a challenge due to safety concerns, technical 
difficulties of producing bright AR images, and having 
consistent environmental conditions for user studies. 
Thus, like other previous research (e.g., Chu & Joseph, 
2008; Kim & Dey, 2009; Medenica et al., 2011; Ng-
Thow-Hing et al., 2013), we conduct our user studies in 
an immersive driving simulation. In the future we aim to 
conduct user studies in real driving conditions outdoors. 
RELATED WORK 
Using AR for car navigation is an area that has been well 
studied. This section reviews previous related research in 
using AR interfaces for vehicle navigation, including 
earlier user experiments and evaluation methods.  
Using AR Cues for Car Navigation 
In a vehicle, the user's tasks fall into primary, secondary 
and tertiary categories (Geiser, 1985). The primary task 
involves the manoeuvring of the vehicle while keeping an 
eye on the surroundings and distance to other cars and 
objects. Secondary tasks are those that supplement the 
primary tasks like controlling the turning indicators or 
windshield wipers. Finally, tertiary tasks do not have any 
relationship with driving, such as using the car radio. 
Each of these tasks typically use different physical areas 
in the driver's space for information display and input. 
The primary task uses the windshield, while secondary 
tasks use the in-car display and controls near the 
windshield, and tertiary tasks use other controls. HUD 
and HMD allow information to be placed in the primary 
task area, while HHD place information on a physical 
display in the secondary task area inside the car. 
The first vehicle HUDs were developed in late 80’s with 
the Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme (Horrey et al., 2003) 
where techniques adopted from the aviation industry were 
used to project information onto the car windshield. The 
first use of HMDs in cars dated back to the late 1990s 
with Regenbrecht’s AR Training System for driver safety 
(Regenbrecht et al., 2005). From the early 2000’s, HDD 
based AR systems such as VICNAS (Hu & Uchimura, 
2004) were developed that added AR navigation cues 
onto live video shown on in-car console display.  
Using HDD for AR Navigation 
One of the easiest ways to provide AR navigation cues is 
to add virtual information to a live camera view shown in 
an in-car display. For example Narzt et al. (2003) 
developed the INSTAR system that used an AR overlay 
on a live video feed shown on a small display mounted on 
the car dashboard. This system combined car GPS and 
orientation sensors with points of interest and map 
information from a spatial database for navigation. 
Around this time researchers were also exploring using 
AR overlay on a HDD to have virtual cues that aligned 
with the real world (Siemens, 2002), rather than just 
using screen aligned navigation cues. For example, the 
VICNAS system (Hu & Uchimura 2004) used hybrid 
tracking with GPS, inertial sensing and computer vision 
combined together to align virtual navigation arrows with 
the real terrain. In the AR-Navi HDD system (Yamaguchi 
et al., 2007), researchers extended this by having both an 
ego-centric AR view and a top-down map view. 
Recently, commercial uses of HDD for in-car navigation 
have become common. One of the earliest uses of AR in 
production cars has been the use of reversing cameras for 
parking 
assistance. 
For 
example, 
Ford 
(2008) 
implemented this in their Fiesta 2011 models with 
forward and reverse parking assistance. There are also 
applications available that can turn any smart phone into 
an AR navigation aid. The 2010 Wikitude Drive 
application, 
(http://www.wikitude.com/wikitude-drive) 
provides turn-by-turn navigation using AR cues on a 
user’s smart phone attached to the car dashboard. 
Using HUD for AR Navigation 
There has been a lot of research on using the windshield 
as a HUD for vehicles. A HUD provides a wider field of 
view than the HDD, overlays graphics on a direct view of 
the real world, and is located in the driver’s primary task 
space, and so doesn’t require the driver to take their eyes 
off the road. For example, the University of Minnesota's 
driver assistance system uses AR technology, and an 
optical HUD for collision avoidance (GPS World, 2010). 
The system showed lane markings to assist the driver 
with navigation during difficult driving conditions. 
Researchers have developed HUD interfaces specifically 
to provide car navigation cues. For example Tonnis et al. 
(2007) created an interface that projects AR cues on the 
windshield that align with the road surface. Narzt et al. 
(2003) goes beyond this to not only show navigation 
arrows, but also highlights freeway exits, points of 
interest such as petrol stations, and alerts to potential 
hazards. More recently, the DICE AR system showed 
how the whole windshield of a car could be used to 
present driver information (Jungwirth, 2012). 
Using the windshield as a display has also been explored 
by commercial brands in recent years. For example, 
Jaguar's Land Rover launched a concept video showing 
AR imagery on a windshield in a car (Jaguar, 2014). This 
display is interactive and has features like virtual racing 
lines that change colour to indicate optimum braking, and 
virtual road cones to train novice drivers. Similarly, 
Pioneer (2012) has launched their Cyber Navi line which 
features both a HUD on the car's sun visor and a fixed 
console on the dashboard that captures video from a 
camera mounted near the rear view mirror. This camera 
scans the road ahead and provides a live video feed to the 
console, and uses object recognition to detect street signs 
and traffic and presents this information with AR cues. 


 
3
Using HMDs for AR Navigation 
There are far fewer examples of AR interfaces using 
HMDs in vehicles. Ferreira et al. (2013) describes the use 
of a video see-through HMD to enable a driver to see 
through vehicles in front of them. In this case the wireless 
video is sent from the lead vehicle to the one following 
behind to show the scene ahead. Santos (2014) describes 
an extension of this where the integrated head tracking in 
the HMD could assist with knowing where the user was 
looking and what virtual cues should appear in his or her 
field of view. Regenbrecht et al. (2005) described how a 
similar system could be used to provide driver training, in 
this case using a video see-through HMD to present a 
number of dangerous driving situations. However none of 
these systems provided navigation cues to the user. 
One of the few AR HMD systems demonstrating an in-
car navigation aid is the work of Foxlin et al. (2014). 
They developed a precise head tracking system for optical 
see-through HMDs in vehicles, and showed virtual tunnel 
navigation cues that guide the user in the direction they 
should go. However the main focus of their work was on 
the in-vehicle tracking system and navigation interface. 
Previous Comparative Studies 
There have been many studies that have compared using 
HUDs to HDDs in driving tasks. These studies typically 
record the driver performance, the number of errors made, 
the driver workload, and the user preference. For example, 
Doshi et al. (2009) conducted a study with the windshield 
as a display and using AR elements to convey an alert 
when the driver drove above the speed limit. They found 
that user’s had a faster reaction time using the HUD than 
when using a HDD. Similarly Liu and Wen (2004) found 
that truck drivers were able to control their speed better 
when shown speed information in a HUD rather than a 
HDD, with a 1.0 second saving in reaction time. 
Medenica et al. (2011) used a driving simulator to 
measure performance with an AR HUD compared to two 
types of HDD navigation aids. Using eye-tracking 
technology they found that with the AR HUD drivers 
were able to keep their eyes on the road significantly 
longer than with a HDD and experienced significantly 
less workload. Other experiments include the work of 
Charissis et al. (2008) that found an AR HUD produced 
significantly less collisions in low visibility conditions 
than a HDD, and Kim and Dey (2009) showing fewer 
navigation and driving errors with a novel AR HUD 
compared to standard HDD. 
Some research has also been conducted on comparing AR 
to non-AR interfaces for the same display type. For 
example, Park et al. (2007) compared driver performance 
when using world-registered arrows to screen-registered 
2D icons on the HUD. They found that drivers had a 
significantly faster response time to lane changing 
information when shown with the world-registered cues. 
Similarly, Sawano and Okado (2006) conducted a study 
comparing an AR HDD to a more traditional HDD with 
non-AR map interface. Users found the AR HDD 
interface to be more understandable, although there was 
no significant difference in driver performance. 
In summary, over the past 20 years researchers have 
developed a range of different AR interfaces for driver 
assistance, using HDD, HUD and HMD techniques. User 
studies show the HUDs provide better performance than 
HDDs, but further research needs to be done with HMDs. 
It seems that there has been little or no work previously 
published comparing the same driving AR interface in a 
HDD, HUD and HMD under the same conditions, either 
in a driving simulator or in real driving conditions. This is 
the research gap that our work seeks to address. 
PROTOTYPE DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 
To test different AR display configuration, a virtual 
driving simulator was developed based on the Oculus Rift 
DK1 HMD and Ferrari Thrustmaster GT steering wheel 
(see Figure 2). The Rift is a wide field of view stereo 
HMD (110 degree diagonally and 90 degree horizontal) 
with 640x800 pixels per eye. The device also comes with 
an orientation and motion sensor (sampling at 1000Hz) to 
track the rotation of the user’s head as they look around 
the virtual world. For audio we used a noise-cancelling 
headset (Audio Technica ATH-ANC33iS). 
 
Figure 2. HMD and steering wheel used. 
The virtual simulation was developed using the Unity3D 
v4.5 game engine (http://unity3d.com) and the UnityCar 
2.2 (http://unitypackages.net/unitycar/joomla/index.php) 
plug-in that provides a realistic vehicle simulation. The 
car used was a left-hand drive model (see Figure 1). A 
virtual human was added to the driver seat and the 
behaviour of the car was connected to the steering wheel 
and pedals. The car model was also tweaked to add 
rendered textures with cameras to the side and central rear 
view mirrors. A forward looking camera was added for 
the AR view. 
The city environment used for the driving simulator was 
the Unity City terrain from UnityCar 2.2. This is an 
extensive city model that has various roads and buildings. 
The map has a set of roads that could be used to navigate 
to a fixed position using different routes (see Figure 3). 
AR Interface 
Most of the development work of the prototype involved 
building three simulated AR displays, a HUD, HDD and 
a HMD. The implementation of each AR display was 
done 
using 
the 
NGUI 
plug-in 
for 
Unity 
(https://www.assetstore.unity3d.com/en/#!/content/2413) 
for implementing 2D user interfaces for the displays. 


 
 
4
 
Figure 3. Virtual city in the prototype. 
The AR interface was used to display speed, the current 
gear, and direction information (see Figure 4). Two-
dimensional arrows were used to show the turn 
information. The driver’s speed was colour coded to 
easily identify how close they were to the speed limit 
(60km/h); Green when below the speed limit, Yellow 
nearing the speed limit and Red when above the speed 
limit. Finally, the display area for each AR display was 
the same size/field of view so that there would be no bias.  
Note that while world-registered cues could take greater 
advantages of AR, we only used screen-registered cues to 
make the study simpler. We plan to further investigate 
world-registered cues in the future.  
 
Figure 4. AR interface design. 
The Windshield HUD simulation was displayed at the 
bottom of the windshield (see Figure 1 middle). For the 
HMD simulation, a display with a 20 degree field of view 
was shown on the top right corner of the user's view, 
similar to Google Glass. The display was fixed to the 
user’s viewpoint and so always in view when they turned 
their head (see Figure 1 bottom). The HDD display had 
its display screen fixed into the console mounted on the 
dashboard (see Figure 1 top). This was placed at 
approximately 30 degrees below the eye level. 
USER EXPERIMENT 
We conducted a user experiment to compare between the 
different simulated AR displays for vehicle navigation. 
The goal was to compare the effects of using different 
types of AR displays for navigation while driving.  
Experiment Design 
A within participants experiment was designed with the 
following three conditions: HUD, HMD, and HDD. In 
each condition, participants were asked to drive fixed 
path in the virtual simulation following the AR navigation 
cues to get to the destination as fast and safe as possible. 
Participants had to fulfil three tasks: 
1. Follow navigational instructions on the display 
2. Keep to the speed limit of 60km/h 
3. Look around for virtual characters in the scene 
Virtual characters were placed on certain positions 
throughout the city. The participant had to look around 
for these characters as they drove and click a button on 
the steering wheel each time they saw them. This was to 
measure how attentive the user was to his or her 
surroundings and to ensure that they looked around at 
intersections and corners similar to real driving conditions. 
The user study was conducted in a small room (3m x 5m), 
where participants sat on a chair using the prototype. 
Procedure 
The whole procedure took about 40 minutes. The 
experiment started with the participant reading the 
information sheet and signing the consent form. The 
procedure was then explained along with how each AR 
display looked and the tasks. Then the researcher assisted 
the participant in putting on the equipment. The 
participant first drove freely for 2 minutes to familiarize 
themselves with the system. Then they tried three 
conditions in order defined with a balanced Latin Square 
design to counterbalance the order effect. It took about 7 
minutes for the participants to complete the task for each 
condition. The task results were logged into a text file. 
After completing the task in each condition, participants 
were asked to fill a questionnaire on comfort, usability 
and efficiency of each AR display. At the end of all three 
test conditions, the participants were asked to fill in a 
questionnaire with their demographic data including age, 
gender, experience with driving, and previous experience 
with the Oculus Rift and Virtual Reality (VR). They were 
also asked to rank the three conditions based on their 
preference. 
There were several objective measurements that were 
recorded. One was the number of navigational errors, 
based on the number of wrong turns the participants made. 
The number of correct turns that a user made was also 
recorded. Since the length of the route changed as the 
user made a wrong turn, we used the ratio of the number 
of wrong turns to total number of turns made. 
As the participant tried navigating through the virtual city, 
they were expected to maintain a speed of 60km/hr. 
Every time they exceeded 62km/hr, the application 
logged the instance. It also recorded the time the user 
spent above this speed until they went back to below the 
speed limit. This measured the time the user took to 
realize that they had crossed the speed limit. 
One of the main requirements for a driver was to be 
aware of their surroundings and identifying hazards. This 
was tested by placing 20 virtual characters at different 
positions. The participants were asked to look around as 
they were driving and to click a button when they spotted 
the character. The number of clicks was logged to help 
understand the level of concentration each AR display 
required from the participant while driving. When a 
participant made a wrong turn, they were directed to get 


 
5
back to where they made the wrong turn so that the 
number of characters to spot was kept as the same. 
We collected subjective feedback through questionnaires 
about the participant's view of each of the condition. The 
questionnaire included 7-point Likert scale rating 
questions (answered on a scale from 1 (totally disagree) 
to 7 (totally agree)), ranking, and open questions for 
collecting qualitative feedback.  See Table 1. 
No. 
Rating Question Statement 
Q1 
The surroundings were clearly visible while 
using the display 
Q2 
The graphics on the display are clearly visible. 
Q3 
Using this display distracted me from driving. 
Q4 
It was easy to navigate using the display. 
Q5 
This display helps me in multitasking between 
maintaining ideal speed, looking around, and 
navigation. 
Q6 
The user interface of the display was useful in 
helping me navigate properly. 
Q7 
I would feel comfortable if asked to wear this 
AR display on a regular basis when I drive. 
Table 1. Likert scale rating questions. 
 
Participants 
Three participants were recruited for a pilot test. The 
results obtained from the pilot test were not included in 
the results of the study, but were used to test the system 
and experimental procedure before the main experiment. 
In the main experiment, 18 participants (14 male and 4 
female) participated in the user study aged between 20 
and 35 years (Mean: 25.5 years). Table 2 summarises 
demographic characteristics of the participants. Their 
driving experience ranged from 1 to 10 years. Several 
participants had used the Oculus Rift before, but none had 
extensive VR experience. Around 33% of participants 
wore glasses while driving, but they could wear their 
glasses together with the HMD. 
Property 
Description 
Age 
20 - 35 years old (Mean: 25.5) 
Gender 
14 male (78%), 4 female (22%) 
Driving 
Experience 
1 - 10 years (Mean: 6.8) 
Eye sight 
12 normal, 6 with prescription glasses 
Table 2. Demographic characteristics of participants. 
 
EXPERIMENT RESULTS 
Overall we found that the HUD produced the least 
navigational errors, while participants exceeded the speed 
limit most in the HDD. In terms of subjective feedback, 
users felt that the HUD scored the best on most of the 
questions in the questionnaire, and users ranked the HUD 
as their most preferred and the HMD as the least. 
Objective Measures 
The objective measures recorded by the system were the 
ratio of navigational errors made, the number of times 
exceeding the speed limit, the time spent above the speed 
limit, and the number of character models detected. 
Shapiro-Wilk test (α=.05) showed all three measures 
were not normally distributed (note that counting events 
usually follow Poison distribution), hence we used a 
Friedman test (α=.05) to analyse the results instead of 
ANOVA. For post hoc tests we used Wilcoxon signed 
rank tests with Bonferroni correction (α=.0167). 
Figure 5 shows the results of the navigational error 
(number of wrong turns divided by all turns). The 
medians [IQR] of the navigation error for the HDD, HMD, 
and HUD conditions were 0.43 [0.09-0.56], 0.41 [0.13-
0.72], and 0.10 [0.05~0.30], respectively. A Friedman test 
found a significant difference between the conditions in 
navigational error made (χ2(2)=15.746, p<.001). Post hoc 
analysis with Wilcoxon signed-rank tests with Bonferroni 
correction showed participants made significantly fewer 
errors with the HUD condition compared to the HDD 
(Z=-2.676, p=.007) and HMD (Z=-3.027, p=.002). There 
was no significant difference between the HDD and 
HMD (Z=-1.111, p=.267) conditions. 
 
Figure 5. Navigational error ratio (*: mean). 
There was a statistically significant difference between 
the conditions in the number of times the participants 
exceeded the speed limit (χ2(2)=10.595, p=.005) (see 
Figure 6). A post hoc analysis found participants 
exceeded the speed limit significantly more times in the 
HDD condition (Median [IQR]: 0.5 [0-4.25]) compared 
the HMD (0 [0-1], Z=-2.442, p=.015) and HUD (0 [0-1], 
Z=-2.675, p=.007), but there was no significant difference 
between HMD and HUD (Z=-0.333, p=.739). 
 
Figure 6. Number of times exceeded speed limit (*: mean). 
Figure 7 shows the average amount of time (in seconds) 
the participants spent above the speed limit. There was a 
statistically significant difference between the conditions 
(χ2(2)=7.091, p=.029). A post hoc analysis revealed that 
the participants exceeded the speed limit significantly 


 
 
6
longer in the HDD condition (45 [0-272.75]) compared to 
the HMD (0 [0-1.75], Z=-2.432, p=.015) and HUD (0 [0-
33.5], Z=-2.599, p=.009) conditions, while no significant 
difference was found between the HMD and HUD 
conditions (Z=-0.255, p=.799). 
 
Figure 7. Amount of time participants spent while exceeding 
the speed limit (in seconds; *: mean). 
The results of the number of characters spotted by the 
participants while driving are summarized in Figure 8. 
There was a statistically significant difference between 
the conditions (χ2(2)=6.971, p=.031), and the post hoc 
analysis showed that there was a statistically significant 
difference between the HDD (10 [7-12]) and HUD (14 
[11.75-18]) conditions in the number of character models 
found (Z=- 2.953, p=.003). The HMD (12.5 [9.5-7.25]) 
condition was not significantly different from the other 
two 
conditions 
(HDD: 
Z=-2.040, 
p=.041 
and  
HUD: Z=-1.357, p=.175). 
 
Figure 8. Number of characters spotted (*: mean). 
Questionnaire – Rating and Ranking 
There were seven Likert scale rating questions on various 
aspects of usability. Participants answered the question on 
a scale from 1 (Totally Disagree) to 7 (Totally Agree). 
Figure 9 summarises the results of the rating questions. 
To assess the results of each question, we used a 
Friedman test (α=.05) to evaluate if there were significant 
difference in rating between the conditions. For post hoc 
analysis we used Wilcoxon signed-rank tests with 
Bonferroni correction (α=.0167). 
The results showed there was no significant difference 
between the conditions (χ2(2)=4.429, p=.109) in terms of 
visibility of the surrounding environment (Q1). However, 
there was a significant difference between the conditions 
(χ2(2)=18.542, p<.001) in visibility of the displays (Q2). 
Post hoc analysis with Bonferroni corrected Wilcoxon 
signed-rank tests revealed the HUD was significantly 
more visible than the other displays (HDD: Z=-3.221, 
p=.001; HMD: Z=-3.375, p=.001). No significant 
difference was found between the HHD and HMD  
(Z=-.108, p=.914). 
For the question asking how distracting the displays are 
(Q3), participants rated each display significantly 
differently (χ2(2)=16.097, p<.001). Post hoc analysis 
revealed that the HUD was significantly less distracting 
than the HDD (Z=-2.954, p=.003) or HMD (Z=-3.363, 
p=.001), while no significant difference was found 
between the HDD and HMD (Z=-1.390, p=.165). 
The type of displays also significantly affected the 
participants perception of ease of navigation (Q4: 
χ2(2)=15.700, p<.001). Participants felt it was easiest to 
navigate with the HUD compared to the other two 
displays 
(HDD: 
Z=-3.037, 
p=.002; 
HMD:  
Z=-3.347, p=.002). No significant difference was 
perceived between HDD and HMD (Z=-.343, p=.731). 
The HUD was rated as the best by the participants for 
helping them to multitask (Q5: χ2(2)=12.125, p=.002; vs. 
HDD: Z=-2.890, p=.004; vs. HMD: Z=-3.139, p=.002), 
while no significant difference was found between the 
HDD and HMD (Z=-.779, p=.436). 
When asked how helpful was the interface display for 
navigating 
properly 
(Q6: 
χ2(2)=11.586, 
p=.003), 
participants gave significantly better rating to the HUD 
compared to the HMD (Z=-3.220, p=0.001). However, 
there was no significant difference between the HUD and 
HDD conditions (Z=-2.244, p=.025) nor between the 
HDD and HMD (Z=-1.664, p=.096). 
Finally, when participants were asked to rate how 
comfortable they felt using each display for driving (Q7) 
they 
rated 
the 
displays 
significantly 
differently 
Figure 9. Likert scale rating results (1: Totally disagree ~ 7: Totally agree, *: mean, s: significant difference) 


 
7
(χ2(2)=8.633, p=.013). Post hoc analysis revealed that 
participants were feeling significantly more comfortable 
with using HUD compared to HMD (Z=-2.495, p=.013), 
yet there was no significant difference between the HDD 
and HMD (Z=-1.535, p=.125), nor between the HDD and 
HUD conditions (Z=-1.551, p=.121). 
After trying all three conditions, participants were asked 
to rank the displays in the order of their preference, from 
1 (the best) to 3 (the worst). Participants ranked the HUD 
display as the best (Median [IQR] = 1 [1-1.75]), while the 
HDD took the second place (2 [2-2.75]), and the HMD 
was ranked as the worst (3 [2-3]). Friedman test found the 
displays were ranked significantly different (χ2(2)=12.366, 
p=.002). A post hoc analysis with Bonferroni corrected 
Wilcoxon signed-rank tests revealed that participants 
ranked the HUD as the most preferable display over the 
other two display (HMD: Z=-2.982, p=.003 and HDD: 
Z=-2.500, p=.012). However there was no significant 
difference in participants’ preference between HDD and 
HMD (Z=-1.380, p=.012). 
Questionnaire – Qualitative Feedback 
In order to understand more details of the participant’s 
subjective opinion on each display, we asked participants 
to write comments on what they liked and disliked about 
each condition. We also asked for any suggestions to 
modify or add to the displays. 
Participants mentioned visibility as the main advantage of 
HUD. They wrote it was “simple and easily visible,” and 
“in the line of sight,” making it “easy to see the real 
world.” Some participants saw the display fixed in the 
space as a positive feature, saying, “It doesn't move with 
my line of sight, I can chose to look away when I wish.” 
But the same feature was also seen as a disadvantage to 
others as they were not able to see the display when they 
had to look around for the virtual characters. A 
participant wrote, “it is a little hard to see the 
surroundings.” 
For HMD, participants mentioned the display following 
the view as the main advantage. They wrote that it was 
“easy to see even when ... not looking forward,” hence it 
was “easy to notice warning messages,” and not requiring 
to “look back at the road to notice directions.” The main 
problem of the HMD was mainly about its position. 
Participants wrote, “the position of the display is 
annoying,” and it is “difficult to focus on the display and 
the real world at the same time.” Participants also 
mentioned that the screen-registered way of showing 
directions is confusing when looking around. A 
participant wrote, “the display moving around is 
disorienting.” 
The HDD was perceived as “familiar to use,” and not 
blocking the user’s view. Participants wrote that it is 
“fixed and doesn't follow my head,” and “out of the way 
and easier to see the surroundings.” On the other hand, 
not being within the primary task space was mentioned as 
the main disadvantage. They wrote, “(it) required me to 
look down and take eyes off the road,” and hence “I don't 
notice the change in speed always.” 
When asked for the reasoning behind the ratings, the 
main reason for the HUD being rated the highest was the 
display being in the field of view while driving so that the 
participant did not have to move their eye and focus away 
from the road. As the HDD was rated most commonly in 
second place, the justification for being lower than the 
HUD was mainly because it requires the participant to 
look off the road. For the HMD being rated the lowest, 
the main reason was the position of the display at the top 
right of the user’s view forced the user to focus on and off 
each time they had look at it and glance back on the road. 
DISCUSSION 
Overall, the results indicate HUD as the best in most area, 
yet each display having their own strength and weak 
points. In terms of navigational errors, participants 
performed better while using HUD compared to the other 
two displays. This may be due to the fact that the 
windshield was always in the clear field of view of the 
user while they were looking through it and there is no 
requirement to glance away from the road (as in the HDD) 
or to change focus (as in the HMD).  
It is also interesting to note that there was a statistically 
significant reduction in the number of errors when using 
the HDD over the HMD, despite the HDD requiring the 
user to look down and away from the road. This may be 
due to having the display following the user head 
orientation might cause them to get confused since the 
instructions shown on the display were relative to the car, 
not the display. This reasoning is supported by some of 
the 
qualitative 
feedback 
given 
where 
the 
users 
complained about the moving display being annoying and 
confusing. 
Despite being statistically better than the HMD at 
avoiding navigational errors, the HDD falls short in both 
the number of times it exceeded the speed limit and the 
time spent above the speed limit. This is probably 
because the driver has to glance off the road and look at 
the console to notice changes. Users also mentioned how 
hard it was to notice warnings on the HDD, which was 
also identified as an advantage for the other two displays. 
In order to test how much the display forces the user to 
take his or her eyes off the road, virtual characters were 
added at places along the map. The HUD clearly wins 
over the HDD in this case, since with the HDD the user is 
busy with his or her eyes off the road and does not notice 
the models in the surroundings.  
There are limitations with the current study that could be 
addressed in future research. For the HMD, the 
navigational instructions were not provided based on 
relative position of the head orientation, making it 
slightly more difficult to understand them. The size of the 
display areas for each AR Display condition was 
controlled to be the same, which could impact the results 
for the HUD and HMD where a much larger display area 
could be used in future setups. The interface layout for 
each display was the same. Changing the layout of the 
interface based on the display may affect the outcome of 
the results. A common layout was used in order to 
prevent bias in the results based on the layout. 


 
 
8
While conducting the study in VR environment gave 
more control of the conditions, it had limitations of not 
being able to fully replicate the real world environment 
(e.g. sun glare, weather effect). Future studies using 
display setups on real vehicles would need to focus on 
further investigating such environmental characteristics. 
Overall, the main implication of the study can be 
summarised as the HUD displays are the most desirable 
type of display for car navigation compared to HDD or 
HMD given similar size of field of view. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper we have presented comparative user 
evaluations of AR HUD, HMD and HDD navigation aids 
in a driving simulator. The HUD was found to produce 
better driving performance, less errors, and was preferred 
over the HDD. The HMD matched the HUD in enabling 
the user to monitor their speed, but users thought it was 
difficult to use and the worst of the display options.  
Much of the criticism for the HMD in this study is based 
on using a monocular peripheral display. With the recent 
advancements in the field of HMDs, there are many other 
display options that would be good to explore. In future, 
it would be good to study how a stereo HMD would 
compare against a HUD or HDD. Another possibility for 
future study would be to explore if the HMD would 
provide 
navigational 
instructions 
relative 
to 
the 
orientation of the head. There are other potential HMD 
interface configurations that could be tested as well. 
Finally, the user study was only conducted in a driving 
simulation. It would be good to test future interfaces in a 
real car driving outdoors to see how closely the results 
match those from the virtual simulation. 
REFERENCES 
Charissis, V., Papanastasiou, S., and Vlachos, G. 
Comparative study of prototype automotive hud vs. 
hdd: collision avoidance simulation and results. 
Technical report, SAE Technical Paper (2008). 
Chu, K. and Joseph, S. Second Life Prototyping of 
Augmented Automobile Navigation Assistance. In 
Proc. ITS 2008, IEEE (2008), 389-394. 
Doshi, A., Cheng, S., and Trivedi, M. A novel active 
heads-up display for driver assistance. IEEE Trans. 
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part B: Cybernetics 
39, 1 (2009), 85-93. 
Ferreira, M., Gomes, P., Silveria M., and Vieira, F. 
Augmented Reality Driving Supported by Vehicular 
Ad Hoc Networking. In Proc. ISMAR 2013, IEEE 
(2013), 253-254. 
Ford. 
park 
assist 
video 
(2008): 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xW-MhoLImqg 
Foxlin, E., Calloway, T., and Zhang, H. Improved 
registration 
for 
vehicular 
AR 
using 
auto- 
harmonization. In Proc. ISMAR 2014, IEEE (2014), 
105-112. 
Geiser, G. Man Machine Interaction in Vehicles. ATZ 87 
(1985), 74 - 77. 
GPS World. Elbow Room on the Shoulder: DGPS-Based 
Lane-Keeping Enlists Laser Scanners for Safety and 
Efficiency 
(2010).  
http://gpsworld.com/transportationroadelbow-room-
shoulder-10159 
Horrey, W. J., Wickens, C. D., and Alexander, A.L. The 
Effects of Head-Up Display Clutter and In-Vehicle 
Display 
Separation 
on 
Concurrent 
Driving 
Performance. In Proc. the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 47, 16 (2003), 
1880-1884. 
Hu, Z. and Uchimura, K. Real-time data fusion on 
stabilizing camera pose estimation output for vision- 
based 
road 
navigation. 
In 
Proc. 
SPIE 
5291, 
Stereoscopic Displays and Virtual Reality Systems XI 
(2004), 480-490. 
Jaguar. 
Virtual 
windscreen 
concept 
(2014). 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FeK9IkSD_nI 
Jungwirth, J. The Appification of the Automobile. 
Technicity (2012). 
Kim, S. and Dey, A. Simulated augmented reality 
windshield display as a cognitive mapping aid for elder 
driver navigation. In Proc. CHI’09 (2009), 133–142. 
Kipper, G. and Rampolla, J. Augmented Reality: an 
emerging technologies guide to AR, Elsevier (2012). 
Liu, Y.-C. and Wen, M.-H. Comparison of head-up 
display (HUD) vs. head-down display (HDD): Driving 
performance of commercial vehicle operators in 
Taiwan. International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies 61, 5 (2004), 679–697. 
Medenica, Z., Kun, A. L., Paek, T., and Palinko, O. 
Augmented reality vs. street views: a driving simulator 
study comparing two emerging navigation aids. In 
Proc. MobileHCI’11, ACM (2011), 265–274. 
Narzt, W., Pomberger, G., Ferscha, A., Kolb, D., Muller, 
R., Wieghardt, J., Hortner, H., and Lindinger, C. 
Pervasive information acquisition for mobile ar- 
navigation systems. In Proc. Workshop on MCSA, 
IEEE (2003), 13-20. 
Ng-Thow-Hing, V., Bark, K., Beckwith, L., Tran, C., 
Bhandari, 
R., 
and 
Sridhar, 
S. 
User-centered 
perspectives for automotive augmented reality. In Proc. 
ISMAR-AMH, IEEE (2013), 13-22 
Park, K. S., Cho, I. H., Hong, G. B., Nam, T. J., Park, J. 
Y., Cho, S. I., and Joo, I. H. Disposition of Information 
Entities 
and 
Adequate 
Level 
of 
Information 
Presentation 
in 
an 
In-Car 
Augmented 
Reality 
Navigation System. In Symp. on Human Interface and 
the Management of Information, LNCS 4558, Springer 
(2007), 1098-1108. 
Pioneer. 
Cyber 
Navi 
system 
(2012): 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FODe8JMniX8 
Regenbrecht, H., Baratoff, G., and Wilke, W. Augmented 
reality projects in the automotive and aerospace 
industries. Computer Graphics and Applications 25, 6 
(2005), 48-56. 


 
9
Santos, M. K. S. Virtual windshields: merging reality and 
digital content to improve the driving experience. 
Master 
thesis, 
Faculdade 
de 
Engenharia 
da 
Universidade do Porto (2014). 
Sawano, H. and Okado, M. Real-time video processing 
by a car-mounted camera and its application to car 
navigation systems by an augmented reality-based 
display method. The Journal of the Society for Art and 
Science 5, 2 (2006). 
Siemens VDO Automotive. (2002). The Future of 
Navigation: Siemens VDO Automotive works on 
Augmented 
Reality, 
Int’l 
Electronics 
Conf. 
Convergence 2002. 
Tonnis, M., Lange, C., and Klinker, G. Visual 
longitudinal and lateral driving assistance in the head- 
up display of cars. In Proc. ISMAR’07 (2007), 91-94. 
Yamaguchi, Y., T. Nakagawa, K. Akaho, M. Honda, H. 
Kato, S. Nishida. AR-Navi: An in-vehicle navigation 
system 
using 
video-based 
augmented 
reality 
technology. In Symp. Human Interface and the 
Management of Information, LNCS 4558, Springer 
(2007), 1139-1147. 
 


