International Journal of Automotive Technology, Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 333−340 (2014)
DOI 10.1007/s12239−014−0034−6
Copyright © 2014 KSAE/ 076−16
pISSN 1229−9138/ eISSN 1976−3832
333
IN-VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY FOR SELF-DRIVING CARS: 
ADVANTAGES AND CHALLENGES FOR AGING DRIVERS
J. YANG1)* and J. F. COUGHLIN2)
1)Department of Automotive Engineering, Kookmin University, Seoul 136-702, Korea
2)Engineering Systems Division, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
(Received 31 October 2013; Revised 20 December 2013; Accepted 29 January 2014)
ABSTRACT−The development of self-driving cars or autonomous vehicles has progressed at an unanticipated pace.
Ironically, the driver or the driver–vehicle interaction is a largely neglected factor in the development of enabling technologies
for autonomous vehicles. Therefore, this paper discusses the advantages and challenges faced by aging drivers with reference
to in-vehicle technology for self-driving cars, on the basis of findings of recent studies. We summarize age-related
characteristics of sensory, motor, and cognitive functions on the basis of extensive age-related research, which can provide a
familiar to better aging drivers. Furthermore, we discuss some key aspects that need to be considered, such as familar to
learnability, acceptance, and net effectiveness of new in-vehicle technology, as addressed in relevant studies. In addition, we
present research-based examples on aging drivers and advanced technology, including a holistic approach that is being
developed by MIT AgeLab, advanced navigation systems, and health monitoring systems. This paper anticipates many
questions that may arise owing to the interaction of autonomous technologies with an older driver population. We expect the
results of our study to be a foundation for further developments toward the consideration of needs of aging drivers while
designing self-driving vehicles. 
KEY WORDS : In-vehicle technology, Self-driving cars, Aging drivers, Navigation systems, Health monitoring systems 
NOMENCLATURE
AARP : american association of retired persons
ACC
: adaptive cruise control
ADAS : advanced driver assistance system
AGNES: age gain now empathy system
ATIS
: advanced traveler information system
FCW
: forward collision warning
HUD
: head-up display
IEEE
: institute of electrical and electronics engineers
IT
: interaction time
IVNS
: in-vehicle navigation system
LKAS
: lane keeping assistance system
NT
: neglect time
NVE
: night vision enhancement
SPAS
: smart parking assistance system
UAV
: unmanned aerial vehicle 
1. INTRODUCTION
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE) predicts that by the year 2040, highways will have
designated lanes for autonomous vehicles (Read, 2013).
Semi-autonomous features, such as the smart parking
assistance system (SPAS), lane keeping assistance system
(LKAS), and adaptive cruise control (ACC), have already
been commercialized, and fully autonomous vehicles will
probably become available within the next 10–20 years.
The development of self-driving cars or autonomous
vehicles has progressed at an unanticipated pace in recent
years. A few years ago, state legislators had not even
considered autonomous cars; currently, however, three
states have enacted legislation on operating self-driving
cars and several more states are considering it. Despite the
speed of technological development, people will probably
accept and adapt to this new technology in the same
manner as they did with other intelligent systems. 
Ironically, the driver or the driver–vehicle interaction is a
largely neglected factor in the development of enabling
technologies for autonomous vehicles. For example, some
vehicle automation features cause considerable confusion
and frustration in the driver, which is typically associated
with poorly integrated systems (Norman, 2003). Despite
humans being adaptable, several critical issues related to
human–vehicle automation become noticeable with
advancements in technology. For example, the term “self-
driving” or “autonomous” can easily mislead people into
thinking that the driver’s role in vehicle operation will
become insignificant with the arrival of advanced vehicles.
In fact, the role of humans in driving is changing from
conventional manual control to supervisory control with an
*Corresponding author. e-mail: yangjh@kookmin.ac.kr


334
J. YANG and J. F. COUGHLIN
increase in the level of vehicle automation. Several issues
pertaining to human–automation interaction are gaining
research attention, and autonomous vehicles are no
exception.
Researchers 
have 
extensively 
studied 
human–
automation issues in the field of aviation, where automated
features such as altitude and speed holds were introduced
several decades ago. In aviation, studies on automation and
mode selection have focused mainly on problems in pilot–
autopilot interaction, such as mode awareness or mode
confusion (e.g., Johnson and Pritchett, 1995; Bredereke
and Lankenau, 2002).
In the past decade, the military has actively used several
different unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) such as the
ScanEagle and Raven. As the number of issues in human
interaction for UAV operation increases, the importance of
these issues from the viewpoint of human control of
unmanned systems becomes increasingly prominent. For
example, mental workload is a limiting factor in deciding
the number of UAVs that an operator can control or
supervise. Previously, researchers attempted to model the
operator capacity for demonstrating the temporal
constraints associated with the UAV system. The
complexity of such work progressed from measuring the
operator capacity in scenarios with homogenous UAVs
controlled by one operator (Olsen and Wood, 2004;
Cummings and Mitchell, 2008; Crandall and Cummings,
2007; Nehme et al., 2008) to scenarios wherein one
operator supervised teams of heterogeneous UAVs
(Nehme, 2009). The first equation developed to predict
operator capacity in homogeneous UAVs suggested that the
operator capacity is a function of the neglect time (NT)—
which is the duration for which the UAV operates
independently—and of the interaction time (IT)—which is
the time for which the operator is busy interacting,
monitoring, and making decisions with the system (Olsen
and Wood, 2004). The mental workload, situational
awareness, and human operators’ trust in automation differ
for different automation levels in human–UAV teams, and
selection of appropriate operation modes is a critical factor
in the successful and efficient completion of missions.
Similarly, we can benchmark human–automation issues
in ground transportation. Aerial and ground transportations
are similar in that vehicles are operated in both these
domains. However, these domains have several key
differences. For example, road traffic has a relatively high
hazard density and probability of two-dimensional
collisions, whereas aerial traffic has a low hazard density
and probability of three-dimensional collisions. The threat
response times for road and aerial transportations are on the
order of seconds and minutes, respectively. Practically
anyone can become a vehicle driver, whereas only highly
trained personnel can become pilots, and the latter need to
maintain their skill through continuous training. When
highly automated systems such as UAVs are introduced
into the aviation domain, the operators will most likely be
active military officers with sufficient expertise in terms of
flight hours, instructor experience, and certified training. In
the case of ground vehicles, the elderly will very likely
encounter the most advanced functionalities of autonomous
vehicles, considering their purchasing power (Coughlin,
2001); in other words, they can afford top-of-the-line and
expensive vehicles, which will have the most advanced
functionality. Population aging has caused an increase in
the number of licensed drivers over the age of 40 (Eby and
Molnar, 2012). Nearly 77 million baby boomers in the
USA (i.e., people born between the years 1946 and 1964)
can be categorized as the automobile generation (Coughlin
and Reimer, 2006). With one of these baby boomers
turning 68 years old every seven seconds, they encounter
new vehicle features that they previously never used or
even imagined. Although the common assumption is that
older people are reluctant to interact with new technology,
research has shown that older adults are actually motivated
to use technologically advanced products upon being
advised about their benefits (Melenhorst et al., 2001).
Then, this paper discusses issues with respect to aged
drivers in terms of the development and use of in-vehicle
technologies in self-driving vehicles, and introduces
ongoing research projects in industry and academia. The
rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
summarizes the characteristics of aging drivers, and
Section 3 discusses key issues in the interaction of aging
drivers with in-vehicle technology. Section 4 introduces
limited examples of research on the relevant area, and
Section 5 provides concluding remarks.
2. CHARACTERISTICS OF AGING DRIVERS
Advanced age obviously distinguishes aging or older
drivers from other drivers. Several studies have
demonstrated systematic differences between drivers as a
function of age, although they are ambiguous about the
exact age at which a person becomes an older driver
(Meyer, 2004; Coughlin, 2001). For example, Meyer
(2004) summarized four reasons for differences between
age groups: (a) cohort effects, which consider generational
effects such as progressive motorization and gender
difference; (b) changing lifestyles, which acknowledge that
aging is also a social process; (c) disease and medication,
wherein both chronic and acute diseases can impair driving
ability; and (d) age-related changes, which are due to the
physiological aging process itself. The literature on age-
related sensory, cognitive, and motor changes is
comprehensive and vast. Therefore, in this paper, we cite
only some recent works and those that concern driving
(e.g., Planek, 1972; Llaneras et al., 2000; Hakamies-
Blomqvist, 1996; Shaheen and Niemeier, 2001; Meyer,
2004).
In this section, based on the extensive review conducted
by Meyer (2004), we briefly discuss some key age-related
changes in each of the above-listed four categories that


IN-VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY FOR SELF-DRIVING CARS: ADVANTAGES AND CHALLENGES
335
affect driving, in order to gain a better understanding of
issues in the interaction of aging drivers with in-vehicle
technology.
2.1. Age-related Changes in Sensory and Motor Functions
Vision may be the most important sensory function that
affects driving because visual information largely guides
driving. In fact, research has suggested that 85%–95% of
the sensory cues in driving are visual (Malfetti and Winter,
1986). Through the course of normal aging, all visual
functions deteriorate, including static and dynamic visual
acuities, contrast sensitivity, night vision, peripheral vision,
visual scan, and glare resistance. Regardless of the well-
established work done on age-related vision degradation in
driving, the exact role of each visual parameter in driving is
not very clear (Groeger, 1999).
Another sensory function that declines with age is
hearing. The loss of hearing ability is much more marked
in the case of high-frequency stimuli (Corso, 1981).
Further, older people show lower sensitivity to touch and
vibration (Gescheider et al., 1994; Harkins and Chapman,
1977). Odor sensitivity also diminishes with age. Although
the deterioration of these sensory functions does not
necessarily affect driving, designers should consider them
when designing new in-vehicle technology, since auditory/
haptic/olfactory stimuli can be used for multiple, effective
warning modalities.
Muscular strength, speed of muscle contraction, and
flexibility also decrease with aging. These changes can
result in delayed responses, and hence, they require greater
power-assisted braking or steering. Approximately half of
the U.S. population over the age of 75 years experiences
some degree of arthritis (Blocker, 1972), and in Korea, 36
% of the population over the age of 65 reportedly has
arthritis (Statistics Korea, 2004). These statistics are
significant because arthritis limits a person’s ability to turn
the head and trunk, and therefore, it makes vehicle ingress
and egress difficult.
2.2. Age-related Changes in Cognitive Function
Cognitive abilities, such as attention, memory, information
processing, and decision-making, are critical for safe
driving. Several cognitive abilities decline as an individual
ages, although the degree of decline varies considerably
with advancing age. Research has shown that a correlation
exists between selective attention and the accident rates of
drivers aged 45–64 years (Mihal and Barrett, 1976) and
that older adults have greater difficulty in dividing attention
effectively than do younger adults (Brouwer et al., 1990).
The ability to divide attention declines with age (Ponds et
al., 1988), and spatial cognition, which affects navigation,
also tends to decline with age (Salthouse, 1987). Memory
problems can occur at any age, but they become
increasingly common in older adults; specifically, older
adults encounter problems such as short-term memory,
encoding, and retrieval of information from long-term
memory (Jacoby and Hay, 1998). Despite the generally
held negative view of aging and memory, research has
shown that semantic memory (memory for facts or general
knowledge) (Cattell, 1963) remains relatively robust
during a person’s lifetime (Morrow et al., 2000).
Fozard et al. (1994) showed that simple response times
were relatively unaffected by age but choice response times
were affected more severely by it. Thus, we can infer a
general slowdown of the speed of information processing
with aging. Some studies have also shown that executive
functioning, or the metacognitive ability that enables a
person to effectively plan, organize, strategize, reason, and
self-regulate (National Center for Learning Disabilities,
2010) tends to decline in aging adults (Mayr et al., 2001;
Zelazo et al., 2004; Eby and Molnar, 2012). Executive
control, which refers to a number of cognitive abilities
related to the maintenance and update of cognitive and
behavioral goals, planning and sequencing of actions,
problem solving, and inhibition of automatic responses
(Boot et al., 2012), tends to decline substantially with age
(Resnick et al., 2003). Poor cognitive functions can affect
safe driving in several ways, including when a person is
engaging in unsafe self-regulated driving, has difficulty in
navigating and gets lost, and responds appropriately to
quickly changing traffic information (Eby and Molnar,
2012). However, many people begin to adjust their driving
as they age: research has shown that elder drivers
strategically avoid dangerous driving situations, such as
night driving, poor weather, and periods of peak traffic, and
they drive more carefully so that they can compensate for
their declined sensory, cognitive, and motor functions
(Waller, 1991; Rudi and Ingrid, 2000). While many see
self-regulation as a success in promoting safety, it could
result in lost mobility.
3. KEY ASPECTS TO CONSIDER FOR NEW 
IN-VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY
3.1. Learnability and Acceptance of New In-vehicle
Technology
Older drivers represent an innovation paradox when
purchasing vehicles. The majority of new in-vehicle
systems are part of the product packaging of higher-end
premium vehicles, which older drivers with purchasing
power often purchase. Older consumers may be less likely
to rapidly learn and use these systems than the natively
digital younger generation. Studies have reported that older
drivers take much longer to learn how to use new in-
vehicle technology (AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety,
2008; Caird, 2004). However, this learnability issue does
not mean that older people are reluctant to learn new
technology. Instead, research shows that older adults are
motivated to use products upon being advised about their
benefits (Melenhorst et al., 2001). Furthermore, experience
with new technologies may increase their willingness to
use them (Boot et al., 2012). Therefore, it is important to


336
J. YANG and J. F. COUGHLIN
design a method that clearly describes the potential benefits
of in-vehicle technology, which would make aging drivers
willing to use the new interface or functions. Once older
drivers gain knowledge of how to interact with the in-
vehicle technology and its benefits, they will be more
motivated to use it. This will help the industry to
appropriately create a new future for driving that
successfully includes their premium customers (Boot et al.,
2012).
Older drivers probably have well over 30 years of
driving experience, which makes them among the safest
and most expert drivers on the road. Ironically, the same
experience can make their learning and ability to use the
new in-vehicle technology a challenge. Research suggests
that younger and older drivers learn to use new technology
differently (Coughlin and Reimer, 2006). If the older, more
experienced drivers are to use the features of new self-
driving or advanced driver assistance systems (ADASs),
such as SPAS, LKAS, ACC, head-up display (HUD), and
brake assist system, they will have to update their driving
skills, after having driven for more than three decades
without these automated features. The industry cannot
expect older drivers to learn and use the new in-vehicle
technology without any training. Lifelong driver education
and training may be one approach. For example,
technology training can be combined with driver education
and training programs, as is done in the American
Association of Retired Persons (AARP) Driver Safety
Program (Coughlin and Reimer, 2006).
3.2. Net Effectiveness of Use of New In-vehicle Technology
Research has shown that older drivers get distracted from
driving when the cause of triggering of a warning system is
not evident. Their accumulated expertise and judgment
cause them to “second-guess” their trust in the authenticity
of the warning, further leading them to look for clear
reasons for the triggering of an alarm. In contrast, younger
operators, who have less experience by definition, have
greater trust in warning systems, often choosing to rely on
the system alone, rather than using it as a driver assist
system (Yick, 2003; Cottè et al., 2001). When drivers
distrust automation, either because of its ambiguity or
complexity or because of its true level of reliability, a
failure of trust calibration occurs, and such an automated
feature will possibly remain unutilized by the drivers
(Wickens et al., 2008). The issue of mistrust of automation
or false alarms has several solutions. One of them is to
allow systems to express their confidence in the signaled
warning at more than one level, which creates an increased
sensitivity in the driver–vehicle system.
Poorly designed in-vehicle technology could increase
distractions and the driving workload for older users,
thereby reducing driving safety. A number of studies have
shown that older drivers often use new technology
differently from younger drivers (Caird, 2004). As
summarized by Eby and Molnar (2012), Gish et al. (2002)
found that older drivers used night vision enhancement
(NVE) systems less commonly than did drivers of other
ages but the former reported being satisfied with the
systems. Older drivers viewed the forward collision
warning (FCW) more favorably (Maltz and Shinar, 2004)
and used navigation assistance frequently; further, despite
reporting some distraction from the system, they
experienced increased feelings of safety and confidence
(e.g., Vrkljan and Polgar, 2007). Studies also reported that
drivers of all ages observed that driver workload and stress
reduced when using ACC, and that the drivers trusted the
system (Rudin-Brown and Parker, 2004; Stanton and
Young, 2005). 
Meyer (2004) also provided four reasons why the
benefits of advanced technology could be less than
expected. First, users may not use the device correctly and
may fail to derive safety benefits. Second, drivers may take
a greater risk upon the introduction of an advanced
technology than they might without the technology, as
proposed in Wilde’s (1988) risk homeostasis theory. Third,
older drivers, who tend to drive more cautiously than
younger drivers, will possibly experience an unacceptably
high false alarm rate, which can lead to them rejecting the
system. Fourth, drivers may develop new behavioral
patterns following the use of the new autonomous
technology.
4. SOME RESEARCH-BASED EXAMPLES OF 
AGING DRIVERS
4.1. Holistic Approach to Designing Vehicles for Older
Drivers 
The MIT AgeLab introduced a concept vehicle designed to
optimize the driving safety and wellness of older adults
(Coughlin et al., 2009; Reimer et al., 2009). They realized
this concept as the AwareCar, which is based on the idea
that crashes can be mitigated by exploiting the interactive
and overlapping roles of the vehicle, environment, and
drivers. The AwareCar is an instrumented vehicle built for
evaluating new models and methods of monitoring driver
state through physiology, visual attention, and driving
performance in the field. A key feature of the AwareCar is
its ability to acquire context-sensitive information on the
driver, environment, and vehicle. A variety of studies have
used this vehicle to assess hands-free cellular phone usage,
provide surrogate measures of visual and cognitive
distractions, and improve driver health and wellness. This
vehicle has also been used to develop functional methods
for assessing age-related changes due to workload, arousal,
and stress.
AGNES (Age Gain Now Empathy System) is another
tool that has been developed and used to gain a deeper
understanding of the friction points in the transportation
system for older adults that can help system designers and
engineers identify barriers to accessibility for older
pedestrians and drivers. Research groups attempted to


IN-VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY FOR SELF-DRIVING CARS: ADVANTAGES AND CHALLENGES
337
provide examples of the aging population in the
transportation domain. For example, Coughlin and Reimer
(2006) presented a modified Haddon matrix (Haddon,
1972) that identified key product development, design, and
liability issues challenging the automobile industry and
related stakeholders. Further, Reimer et al. (2010)
evaluated driver reactions to new vehicle parking assist
technologies. Mehler et al. (2012) assessed the sensitivity
of the heart rate and skin conductance level for
discriminating between levels of cognitive demand under
driving conditions across different age groups. Reimer et
al. (2013) evaluated the effects of age and cognitive
demand on lane choice and lane changing behavior from an
on-road study.
4.2. Advanced Navigation Systems for Aging Drivers
Researchers have focused on in-vehicle navigation systems
(IVNSs) because these systems are expected to maintain
the mobility of older people, for example, by reducing visual
processing and attentional demands, reducing navigational
errors, and improving overall driving performance (Dingus
et al., 1997; Llaneras et al., 2000). Below, we discuss some
research-based examples of aging drivers.
Baldwin (2002) applied sensory–cognitive interaction
theory and discussed its implications for the design of in-
vehicle technologies, such as advanced traveler information
systems (ATISs). The sensory–cognitive interaction theory
states that sensory abilities account for substantial amounts
of variance in cognitive performance among older adults,
and can be a better predictor of cognitive performance than
age alone (Lindenberger and Baltes, 1994). Baldwin (2002)
stated that in-vehicle technologies that provide essential
navigational information can greatly improve driver safety
among older adults, but stressed that the interaction
between sensory and cognitive functions clearly needs to
be investigated further, e.g., the potential of sensory
augmenting designs.
May et al. (2005) described an empirical, road-based
investigation of the benefits of providing landmarks within
the instructions presented by an IVNS to both older and
younger drivers. Their study showed that both younger and
older drivers benefited significantly from the incorporation
of landmarks in the turn-by-turn instructions provided by
the IVNS. The design recommendations regarding future
navigation systems that older drivers may possibly use are
that they should not rely on distance-to-turn information to
locate forthcoming maneuvers. Their study also showed
that these systems would be useful for older drivers and
received positively if they met a perceived need and were
designed effectively.
Kim et al. (2010) examined older and younger adults’
perceptions regarding a set of 28 motor vehicle features
and aspects, to determine the extent to which the
participants believed that the individual features might help
their safe driving. Their study did not focus on advanced
in-vehicle technologies; rather, it examined the potential
benefits of existing vehicle features such as dashboard,
side-view mirrors, indicators, and controls. Kim et al.
(2010) compared two different in-vehicle navigation
systems, and on the basis of a focus group interview, they
proposed a configuration of the navigation menu for the
best readability and transmissibility.
Emmerson et al. (2012) reported findings of six focus
groups with older drivers; the findings revealed that older
drivers have a navigation need that is currently not being
fulfilled. The majority of older drivers responded positively
toward the use of in-vehicle technology; yet, it was evident
that they lacked the ability to fully utilize this technology.
Even the older drivers who were more traditional in their
navigation approach used modern pre-trip planning tools to
assist them, indicating an awareness among aging drivers
about how the new in-vehicle technology can assist them.
Consequently, their subsequent maintained mobility could
have far-reaching effects on society upon the removal of
known barriers (e.g., a complex screen). 
4.3. In-vehicle Health Monitoring Systems 
Like the IVNS, in-vehicle health monitoring systems have
been developed and studied actively in both academia and
industry. For example, Ford has developed a car seat that
can check the driver’s heart rate and could warn of an
impending heart attack, and GM has begun offering
emergency healthcare instruction through the OnStar
(Naughton, 2011). The Philips Chair of Medical
Information Technology, in a cooperation project with the
Ford Research Center in Aachen, developed and evaluated
a capacitive electrocardiogram measurement system
integrated into the driver seat (Eilebrecht et al., 2011).
SYNC, the voice-activated technology developed by Ford,
allows drivers to access their smartphone applications, and
a growing number of those applications are related to
healthcare (English, 2013). A steering wheel developed at
the Munich Technical University in collaboration with
BMW has a built-in sensor and is capable of measuring the
heart rate, blood-oxygen level, and blood pressure (Trei,
2011). Long since driver health-monitoring systems
received research attention, the integration of advanced
collision notification systems (ACNSs) into new cars has
undergone substantial development, and this is only the
beginning. Current applications use an array of sensors to
detect the location of an accident and then notify
emergency services. More recently, an extended view of an
ACNS includes detection of driver/occupant weight,
distance from wheel, and other features that enable the
vehicle to play an active role in adjusting the force of
airbag deployment (Coughlin and Reimer, 2006). The car,
in addition to aiding a rapid deployment of emergency
services to the scene, could become a platform for helping
organize the emergency room and trauma resources before
help arrives. 


338
J. YANG and J. F. COUGHLIN
5. CONCLUSION
Transportation is critical to everyday life, and it involves
more than simply getting from point A to point B. The
worldwide aging population poses a number of new safety-
and technology-based challenges to the automobile
industry, as well as to related stakeholders in the
government, insurance, and health industries. This paper
reviewed the effects of aging on sensory, motor, and
cognitive functions, and discussed the learnability,
acceptance, and net effectiveness of new in-vehicle
technology by aging drivers. Extensive research in this
field indicates a potential increasing demand for in-vehicle
technology for aging drivers. This paper anticipates many
questions that may arise from the interaction of
autonomous technologies with an older driver population,
and we expect the results of our exploration to be a
foundation 
for 
further 
developments 
toward 
the
consideration of needs of aging drivers while designing
self-driving vehicles. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT–This work was supported in part by
the Technology Innovation Program (1004761, Development of
connectivity-based personalized intelligent integration cockpit
module with analysis function of driver’s condition and driving
environment) funded by Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy,
the new faculty research program of Kookmin University, Korea,
the US Department of Transportation New England University
Transportation Center, and Santos Family Foundation. We are
grateful to Hyung Joon Kim for supporting us organizing the
references. 
REFERENCES
AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety (2008). Use of
Advanced In-Vehicle Technology by Young and Older
Early Adopters. AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety
Report. DOT-HS-810-828.
Baldwin, C. L. (2002). Designing in-vehicle technologies
for older drivers: Application of sensory-cognitive
interaction theory. Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics
Science 3, 4, 307−329. 
Blocker Jr, W. P. (1992). Maintaining functional independence
by mobilizing the aged. Geriatrics 47, 1, 42, 48−50, 53.
Boot, W. R., Nichols, T. A., Rogers, W. A. and Fisk, A. D.
(2012). Design for aging. in Salvendy, G., Handbook of
Human Factors and Ergonomics. 4th edn. John Wiley &
Sons. New York. 1409−1471.
Bredereke, J. and Lankenau, A. (2002). A rigorous view of
mode confusion. Proc. 21st Safecomp Int. Conf., 19−31.
Brouwer, W., Ickenroth, J., Ponds, R. and Van Wolffelaar,
P. (1990). Divided attention in old age: Difficulty in
integrating skills. European Perspectives in Psychology,
2, 335−348.
Caird, J. (2004). In-vehicle intelligent transportation
systems: Safety and mobility of older drivers. Proc. 27,
TRB Conf., 236−258.
Cattell, R. B. (1963). Theory of fluid and crystallized
intelligence: A critical experiment. J. Educational
Psychology 54, 1, 1−22.
Corso, J. F. (1981). Aging Sensory Systems and Perception.
Praeger. New York.
Cotté, N., Meyer, J. and Coughlin, J. F. (2001). Older and
younger drivers' reliance on collision warning systems.
Proc. HFES Annual Meeting 45, 4, 277−280.
Coughlin, J. F. (2001). Beyond Health and Retirement:
Placing Transportation on the Aging Policy Agenda.
MIT AgeLab Tech Report.
Coughlin, J. F. and Reimer, B. (2006). New demands from
an older population: An integrated approach to defining
the future of older driver safety. Proc. SAE Convergence
Conf., Detroit, Michigan.
Coughlin, J. F., Reimer, B. and Mehler, B. (2009). Driver
Wellness, Safety & the Development of an Awarecar.
MIT AgeLab Tech Report.
Crandall, J. W. and Cummings, M. L. (2007). Identifying
predictive metrics for supervisory control of multiple
robots. IEEE Trans. Robotics 23, 5, 942−951. 
Cummings, M. L. and Mitchell, P. J. (2008). Predicting
controller capacity in supervisory control of multiple
UAVs. IEEE-Part A: Systems and Humans 38, 2, 451−
460. 
Dingus, T. A., Hulse, M. C., Mollenhauer, M. A.,
Fleischman, R. N., Mcgehee, D, V. and Manakkal, N.
(1997). Effects of age, system experience, and navigation
technique on driving with an advanced traveler
information system. Human Factors 39, 2, 177−199. 
Eby, D. W. and Molnar, L. J. (2012). Cognitive impairment
and driving safety. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 49,
261−262.
Eilebrecht, D. I. B., Wartzek, D. I. T., Lem, D. I. J. and
Vogt, P. D. R. (2011). Capacitive electrocardiogram
measurement system in the driver seat. ATZ Worldwide
eMagazines 113, 3, 50−55. 
Emmerson, C., Guo, A. W., Blythe, P. and Namdeo, A.
(2012). In-vehicle navigation systems and older drivers.
19th ITS World Cong., Vienna, Austria. 
English, A. (2013). Cars that can monitor your health.
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/motoring/road-safety/
10013373/Cars-that-can-monitor-your-health.html
Fozard, J. L., Vercryssen, M., Reynolds, S. L., Hancock, P.
A. and Quilter, R. E. (1994). Age differences and
changes in reaction time: The baltimore longitudinal
study of aging. J. Gerontology 49, 4, 179−189.
Gescheider, G. A., Bolanowski, S., Hall, K., Hoffman, K.
and Verrillo, R. (1994). The effects of aging on
information-processing channels in the sense of touch: I.
Absolute 
sensitivity. 
Somatosensory 
and 
Motor
Research 11, 4, 345−357. 
Gish, K. W., Shoulson, M. and Perel, M. (2002). Driver
behavior and performance using an infrared night vision
enhancement system. 81st TRB Meeting, Washington,
DC.


IN-VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY FOR SELF-DRIVING CARS: ADVANTAGES AND CHALLENGES
339
Groeger, J. A. (1999). Expectancy and Control: Perceptual
and Cognitive Aspects of the Driving Task., in Hancock,
P. A., Human Performance and Ergonomics. Academic
Press. 243−264.
Haddon Jr, W. (1972). A logical framework for
categorizing highway safety phenomena and activity. J.
Trauma and Acute Care Surgery 12, 3, 193−207. 
Hakamies-Blomqvist, L. (1996). Research on older drivers:
A review. IATSS Research, 91−101. 
Harkins, S. W. and Chapman, C. R. (1977). The perception
of induced dental pain in young and elderly women. J.
Gerontology 32, 4, 428−435. 
Jacoby, L. L. and Hay, J. F. (1998). Age-related deficits in
memory: Theory and application. Theories of Memory,
2, Psychology Press, 111−134.
Johnson, E. N. and Pritchett, A. R. (1995). Experimental
Study of Vertical Flight Path Mode Awareness. ICAT
Report No. ASL-95-3. 
Kim, S., Wogalter, M. S. and Mayhorn, C. B. (2010). Older
and younger drivers' beliefs about motor vehicle features
to benefit their safe driving. Proc. HFES Annual
Meeting 54, 2, 160−164. 
Lindenberger, U. and Baltes, P. B. (1994). Sensory
functioning and intelligence in old age: A strong
connection. Psychology and Aging 9, 3, 339−355.
Llaneras, R., Lerner, N., Dingus, T. and Moyer, J. (2000).
Attention demand of IVIS auditory displays: An on-road
study under freeway environments. Proc. HFES Annual
Meeting 44, 20, 238−241. 
Malfetti, J. L. and Winter, D. J. (1986). Drivers 55 plus:
Test your own performance. AAA Foundation for
Traffic Safety, Washington, DC.
Maltz, M. and Shinar, D. (2004). Imperfect in-vehicle
collision avoidance warning systems can aid drivers.
Human Factors 46, 2, 357−366. 
May, A., Ross, T. and Osman, Z. (2005). The design of
next generation in-vehicle navigation systems for the
older driver. Interacting with Computers 17, 6, 643−659.
Mayr, U., Spieler, D. and Kliegl, R. (2001). Ageing and
executive control: Introduction to this special issue.
European J. Cognitive Psychology 13, 1/2, 1−4. 
Mehler, B., Reimer, B. and Coughlin, J. F. (2012).
Sensitivity of physiological measures for detecting
systematic variations in cognitive demand from a
working memory task an on-road study across three age
groups. Human Factors 54, 3, 396−412. 
Melenhorst, A., Rogers, W. A. and Caylor, E. C. (2001).
The use of communication technologies by older adults:
Exploring the benefits from the user's perspective. Proc.
HFES Annual Meeting 45, 3, 221−225.
Meyer, J. (2004). Personal vehicle transportation. The
National Academies Press. 253−281. 
Mihal, W. L. and Barrett, G. V. (1976). Individual
differences in perceptual information processing and
their relation to automobile accident involvement. J.
Applied Psychology 61, 2, 229−233.
Morrow, D., Carver, L. M., Leirer, V. O. and Tanke, E. D.
(2000). Medication schemas and memory for automated
telephone messages. Human Factors 42, 4, 523−540.
Naughton, K. (2011). Ford Sees Sales Surge With New
Diabetes-to-Heart 
Dashboard: 
Cars. 
http://
www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-05-26/ford-sees-sales-
surge-with-new-diabetes-to-heart-dashboard-cars.html
Nehme, C. E. (2009). Modeling Human Supervisory Control
in Heterogeneous Unmanned Vehicle Systems. Ph.D.
Dissertation. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Nehme, C. E., Crandall, J. W. and Cummings, M. L.
(2008). Using discrete-event simulation to model
situational awareness of unmanned-vehicle operators.
Proc. Virginia Modeling, Analysis and Simulation
Center Capstone Conf.
Norman, D. A. (2003). Interaction design for automobile
interiors. 
http://www.jnd.org/dn.mss/inter 
action_
design_f.html
Olsen Jr., D. R. and Wood, S. B. (2004). Fan-out:
Measuring human control of multiple robots. Proc.
SIGCHI Conf. Vienna, Austria, 231−238.
Planek, T. W. (1972). The aging driver in today's traffic: A
critical review. North Carolina Symp. Highway Safety,
Chapel Hill, NC.
Ponds, R. W., Brouwer, W. H. and Van Wolffelaar, P. C.
(1988). Age differences in divided attention in a
simulated driving task. J. Gerontology 43, 6, 151−156. 
Read, R. (2012). IEEE Says That 75% Of Vehicles Will Be
Autonomous By 2040. http://www.thecarconnection.
com/news/1079261_ieee-says-that-75-of-vehicles-will-
be-autonomous-by-2040 
Reimer, B., Coughlin, J. F. and Mehler, B. (2009).
Development of a driver aware vehicle for monitoring,
managing & motivating older operator behavior. ITS-
America’s 2009 Annual Meeting, Washington, DC.
Reimer, B., Donmez, B., Lavallière, M., Mehler, B.,
Coughlin, J. F. and Teasdale, N. (2013). Impact of age
and cognitive demand on lane choice and changing
under actual highway conditions. Accident Analysis &
Prevention, 52, 125−132. 
Reimer, B., Mehler, B. and Coughlin, J. F. (2010). An
Evaluation of Driver Reactions to New Vehicle Parking
Assist Technologies Developed to Reduce Driver Stress.
MIT AgeLab Tech Report. 
Reimer, B., Puleo, R., D'Ambrosio, L., Coughlin, J.
Cichon, J. and Griffith, D. (2006). Driver Flexibility:
The Impact of Age on Rotation. Currently under
Review, MIT AgeLab Tech Report. 
Resnick, S. M., Pham, D. L., Kraut, M. A., Zonderman, A.
B. and Davatzikos, C. (2003). Longitudinal magnetic
resonance imaging studies of older adults: a shrinking
brain. J. Neuroscience 23, 8, 3295−3301.
Rudi, D. R. and Ingrid, P. K. (2000). The relationship
between cognitive/neuropsychological factors and car
driving performance in older adults. J. American
Geriatrics Society 48, 12, 1644−1668.


340
J. YANG and J. F. COUGHLIN
Rudin-Brown, C. M. and Parker, H. A. (2004). Behavioural
adaptation to adaptive cruise control (ACC): Implications
for preventive strategies. Transportation Research Part F
7, 2, 59−76. 
Salthouse, T. A. (1987). Adult age differences in
integrative spatial ability. Psychology and Aging 2, 3,
254−260. 
Salvendy, G. (2012). Handbook of Human Factors and
Ergonomics. 4th edn. John Wiley & Sons. New York.
Shaheen, S. A. and Niemeier, D. A. (2001). Integrating
vehicle design and human factors: minimizing elderly
driving constraints. Transportation Research Part C:
Emerging Technologies 9, 3, 155−174. 
Stanton, N. A. and Young, M. S. (2005). Driver behaviour
with adaptive cruise control. Ergonomics 48, 10, 1294−
1313. 
Statistics Korea (2004). Elderly Statistics, Statistics Korea
Technical Report.
Trei, M. (2011). Smart steering wheel checks your vital
signs as you drive. http://www.dvice.com/archives/2011/
11/smart_steering.php
Vrkljan, B. H. and Polgar, J. M. (2007). Linking
occupational participation and occupational identity: An
exploratory study of the transition from driving to
driving cessation in older adulthood. J. Occupational
Science 14, 1, 30−39.
Waller, P. F. (1991). The older driver. Human Factors 33, 5,
499−505. 
Wickens, C. D., Lee, J. D., Liu, Y. and Gordon, S. E.
(2008). An Introduction to Human Factors Engineering.
2nd edn. Pearson. Upper Saddle River. New Jersey. 
Wilde, G. J. (1988). Risk homeostasis theory and traffic
accidents: propositions, deductions and discussion of
dissension in recent reactions.  Ergonomics 31, 4, 441−
468. 
Yick, K. (2003). Design and Test of Intersection Collision
Avoidance Systems for Automobiles. M.S. Thesis.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Zelazo, P. D., Craik, F. I. and Booth, L. (2004). Executive
function across the life span. Acta Psychologica 115, 2,
167−183.


