Surgeons blinded by enhanced navigation: the effect of augmented
reality on attention
Benjamin J. Dixon • Michael J. Daly •
Harley Chan • Allan D. Vescan • Ian J. Witterick •
Jonathan C. Irish
Received: 27 February 2012 / Accepted: 11 June 2012 / Published online: 26 July 2012
 Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2012
Abstract
Background
Advanced image-guidance systems allowing
presentation of three-dimensional navigational data in real
time are being developed enthusiastically for many medical
procedures. Other industries, including aviation and the
military, have noted that shifting attention toward such
compelling assistance has detrimental effects. Using the
detection rate of unexpected ﬁndings, we assess whether
inattentional blindness is signiﬁcant in a surgical context
and evaluate the impact of on-screen navigational cuing
with augmented reality.
Methods
Surgeons and trainees performed an endoscopic
navigation exercise on a cadaveric specimen. The subjects
were randomized to either a standard endoscopic view
(control) or an AR view consisting of an endoscopic video
fused with anatomic contours. Two unexpected ﬁndings
were presented in close proximity to the target point: one
critical complication and one foreign body (screw). Task
completion time, accuracy, and recognition of ﬁndings
were recorded.
Results
Detection of the complication was 0/15 in the AR
group versus 7/17 in the control group (p = 0.008).
Detection of the screw was 1/15 (AR) and 7/17 (control)
(p = 0.041). Recognition of either ﬁnding was 12/17 for
the control group and 1/15 for the AR group (p \ 0.001).
Accuracy was greater for the AR group than for the control
group, with the median distance from the target point
measuring
respectively
2.10
mm
(interquartile
range
[IQR], 1.29–2.37) and 4.13 (IQR, 3.11–7.39) (p \ 0.001).
Conclusion
Inattentional blindness was evident in both
groups. Although more accurate, the AR group was less
likely to identify signiﬁcant unexpected ﬁndings clearly
within view. Advanced navigational displays may increase
precision, but strategies to mitigate attentional costs need
further investigation to allow safe implementation.
Keywords
Attentional tunneling  Augmented reality 
Endoscopic surgery  Image-guided surgery  Inattentional
blindness  Surgical navigation
Most procedural specialties have shown an increasing trend
toward endoscopic, image-guided, minimally invasive
techniques. Compared with open approaches, minimally
invasive techniques may provide a narrower ﬁeld of view
and fewer spatial cues. This has resulted in a greater reli-
ance on technology to aid in diagnosis and precise
navigation.
As these procedures have evolved, there have been
parallel advances in imaging technology that can provide
an accurate submillimeter, three-dimensional (3D) repre-
sentation of the operative ﬁeld. Not surprisingly, ever
B. J. Dixon  I. J. Witterick  J. C. Irish (&)
Department of Surgical Oncology, Princess Margaret Hospital,
University Health Network, University of Toronto, 610
University Avenue, 3-954, Toronto, ON M5G 2M9, Canada
e-mail: jonathan.irish@uhn.on.ca
B. J. Dixon
e-mail: benjohndixon@hotmail.com
B. J. Dixon  I. J. Witterick  J. C. Irish
Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Princess
Margaret Hospital, University Health Network, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
M. J. Daly  H. Chan
Ontario Cancer Institute, Princess Margaret Hospital, University
Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
A. D. Vescan  I. J. Witterick
Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Mount
Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
123
Surg Endosc (2013) 27:454–461
DOI 10.1007/s00464-012-2457-3
and Other Interventional Techniques 


increasing efforts have been made to use these data in a
more dynamic way during performance of tasks.
Currently, image-guided surgery (IGS) systems are
commonly used for many procedures [1], especially when
the operative site is within a relatively rigid framework as
in neurosurgery, skull base surgery, and sinonasal surgery.
In such areas, ﬁndings have shown that IGS systems
signiﬁcantly
change
surgical
strategy
[2].
Technical
advancements in intraoperative imaging and deformable
registration [3] currently are allowing IGS to be used in
areas wherein soft tissue deformation and artifact from
respiratory movement and arterial pulsation had previously
rendered this technology not viable [4, 5].
The Guided Therapeutics program at University Health
Network, Toronto has developed a navigation system that
incorporates intraoperative imaging and image registration
[6, 7]. Anatomic segmentation and endoscope tracking then
allows 3D representation of imaging and contouring data,
which can be used during endoscopic surgery in real time
[8]. This can be displayed as a virtual view on a submonitor
or fused with the main endoscopic image as augmented
reality (Fig. 1).
Augmented reality (AR) describes the placement of
virtual objects within a real environment in real time,
meaning that true and virtual images are combined in a
dynamic fashion [9]. This technique holds the promise of
displaying accurate anatomic data derived from adjunct
imaging on the endoscopic monitor during a procedure.
Intuitively, most physicians recognize the potential clutter
or visual overstimulation inherent in such a display.
Although many research groups, including ours, have
reported on the potential clinical beneﬁts of this technology
[8, 10–12], the possible detrimental effects of AR displays
remain poorly investigated or discussed.
Human factors and psychological studies suggest that
compelling displays such as AR alter attentional focus
during the performance of tasks. Even in the absence of
additional cues, people concentrating on a task may fail to
recognize highly notable events or objects that appear
within their visual ﬁeld. This phenomenon, known as
‘‘inattentional blindness,’’ becomes more evident when
tasks demand greater attention [13]. It might be expected
that accurate and accessible navigational data would
decrease cognitive demand during a procedure and allow
for a greater allocation of attention to alternative tasks [14].
However, evidence from the aviation, military, and auto
industries suggests that the opposite occurs. Drawing
attention to a certain cue in fact increases the chance of
missing unexpected but important events occurring in the
same environment [15, 16].
Fig. 1 A Still screen shot taken during the endoscopic trial of the
standard view with opacity at 75 %. Relevant ﬁndings are labeled
including foreign body and complication. B Same image as in A with
augmented reality (AR) fusion at 25 %. This is an actual screen-shot
from a participant in the AR group who missed both ﬁndings.
C Example showing a virtual view of contours with wire mesh
surface rendering. D Trial setup displaying monitor and optical
image-guided surgery (IGS)
Surg Endosc (2013) 27:454–461
455
123


To reﬁne the user interface of our image-guidance sys-
tem, we aimed to assess the impact of AR on visual
attention using a randomized-controlled trial comparing
conventional endoscopy with an AR view (Fig. 1A, B).
Endoscopic transnasal skull base navigation in a cadaveric
specimen was chosen as the surgical model because it
provides a complex 3D environment within a rigid
framework that can be accurately registered.
Endoscopic
approaches
to
skull
base
tumors
are
increasingly popular, and the use of image guidance in this
setting is almost ubiquitous. The main outcome measure
was the detection rate of two deliberately presented unex-
pected ﬁndings: one critical complication and one foreign
body. Previous studies investigating inattentional blindness
presented ﬁndings that were clearly out of place, and the
foreign body (a screw) was chosen to replicate these
experiments in a surgical setting. We also wished to
present a surgically relevant abnormality, so the critical
complication (injured optic nerve) was added.
Importantly, we did not aim to assess the validity of any
surgical approach or technique nor the competence of the
participants. Rather, we wished to assess the effect that
on-screen cuing with AR had on detection of unexpected
ﬁndings as a measure of the potential attentional cost of
these systems.
Methods
Otolaryngology trainees, fellows, and staff surgeons par-
ticipated in the trial on a fully functional, dynamic endo-
scopic
AR
prototype
after
informed
consent
and
institutional
ethics
approval.
A
single
cadaver
head
underwent a computed tomography (CT) scan after ﬁxation
of ﬁduciary markers. Anatomic contours of critical struc-
tures then were manually delineated using the ITK-Snap
(University of Pennsylvania, PA) [17] (Fig. 1C). Sinonasal
dissection, including ethmoidectomy and a wide uniﬁed
sphenoidotomy, then was performed consistently with
exposure for trans-sphenoidal skull base surgery such as
pituitary surgery. A postablation cone-beam computed
tomography (CT) image was acquired, and contours were
rigidly registered to this scan [6].
An optical IGS (Polaris; NDI, Waterloo, Ontario) sys-
tem was used with custom visualization software for real-
time tracking of a 0 endoscope (Hopkins II telescope and
IMAGE1 camera; Karl Storz, Tuttlingen, Germany) and a
probe. A dynamic virtual endoscopic image then could be
displayed by registering imaging and contouring data to the
head [8].
Two unexpected ﬁndings were present in the specimen.
First, a foreign object (small screw) was placed within the
sphenoid sinus. Second, the optic nerve was divided at the
chiasm, dissected along the canal, and draped into the
sinus. This represented one totally unexpected ﬁnding and
one critical complication (Fig. 1A). The subjects then were
randomized to perform a navigation task in one of two
endoscopic environments:
1.
Standard endoscopy (control group): The image was
adjusted to 75 % opacity to match the image quality
of the AR view, but no contour fusion was added
(Fig. 1A).
2.
Augmented reality (AR group): The endoscopic view
was adjusted to 75 % opacity, with anatomic contours
seen as a fusion in the remaining 25 % (Fig. 1B).
Each subject undertook the following task after ran-
domization to one arm of the study. A brieﬁng outlined the
prior dissection, the AR technology, and the anatomic
contours. Unaware of which view he or she would receive,
each participant was asked to locate, with a tracked pointer,
the anterior face of the sella turcica (pituitary fossa) in the
midline as accurately and efﬁciently as possible. The AR
group viewed precontoured anatomic data fused with the
endoscopic image, which was updated dynamically in real
time as the subject moved the endoscope. The subjects
were aware that they were being timed, but no time limits
were enforced. Randomization was stratiﬁed to balance the
level of surgical experience in each group.
Once the subject indicated that he or she had located the
target area, the 3D coordinates and time were recorded, and
the endoscopic image was hidden. The following questions
then were asked: (1) Did you notice anything unusual? (2)
Did you note any critical complication? (3) Did you notice
a foreign body in the sphenoid sinus? (4) Did you notice a
screw? Binary responses (yes/no) were documented. Video
footage of the monitor and the room were recorded
separately.
Statistical analysis
Analysis was performed using SPSS Statistics 19 (Chicago,
IL, USA). The recognition rates for unexpected ﬁndings
between the two groups were compared using the two-
sided Fisher’s exact test. Spearman’s rank correlations
were performed to identify any signiﬁcant factors associ-
ated with recognition of the ﬁndings. Binary logistic
regression analysis, with Wald forward and backward
modeling, was performed to assess whether randomization
group, time taken, or experience level was independently
associated with noting an unexpected ﬁnding. Task accu-
racy was assessed by measuring the distance from a ‘‘gold
standard’’ target point set by the investigators aided by
image guidance. Linear regression analysis was used to
assess again the impact of group, experience level, and
time on accuracy.
456
Surg Endosc (2013) 27:454–461
123


Results
The study enrolled 33 otolaryngology residents, fellows,
and surgeons spanning all levels of experience. There was
an equal distribution of experience levels between groups
(likelihood ratio, 0.98). One subject in the AR group was
excluded from the analysis because the AR malfunctioned
due to processing latency in the laptop computer, freezing
the superimposed virtual view in a static position. Retro-
spective scrutiny of individual video footage showed that
both unexpected ﬁndings were clearly seen on the monitor
in every instance.
Recognition of unexpected ﬁndings
Only 4 of the 32 subjects in the study noticed something
unusual (question 1), with two commenting during the
exercise.
Direct questioning about noticing a critical complication
(question 2) resulted in correct answers by 7 (41 %) of 17
subjects in the control group and 0 (0 %) of 15 subjects in
the AR group (p = 0.008). The same ratios were present
for question 3 with regard to noticing a foreign body
(Table 1).
One subject from the AR group altered his answer for
question 4 (Did you see a screw?) from his response to
question 3, meaning 1 (7 %) of 15 subjects in the AR group
noticed a screw compared with 7 of 17 subjects in the
control group (p = 0.041). Altogether, 12 subjects in the
control group noticed a ﬁnding (5 noted a complication, 5 a
foreign body, 2 both) compared with 1 subject in the AR
group (p \ 0.001).
The AR group showed a trend toward a shorter task
completion time (p = 0.153) (Table 1). Logistic regression
analysis showed that randomization group was the only
signiﬁcant independent variable for all the unexpected
ﬁndings (all p \ 0.03). After control was used for display
group, time and experience level were not signiﬁcant.
The median task completion time for the subgroup
reporting a ﬁnding (28 s; interquartile range [IQR], 22.5–33
s) was signiﬁcantly longer than for those who missed the
ﬁndings (19 s; IQR, 12–30 s) (p = 0.03, Mann–Whitney
U test). The more experienced subjects exhibited a trend
toward a faster completion time (R = 0.33; p = 0.064,
Spearman correlation coefﬁcient).
Accuracy
A 3D representation of the localized points with target
reference is shown in Fig. 2A. The median distance from
the designated target point was signiﬁcantly shorter in the
AR group (2.10 mm; IQR, 1.29–2.37 mm) than in the
control group (4.13 mm; IQR, 3.11–7.39 mm) (p \ 0.001)
(Table 1). Display type was the only signiﬁcant variable
for accuracy, but there was a trend toward greater accuracy
with experience (p = 0.074). In Fig. 2B, localized points
are graphically represented on a CT image as an anatomic
reference.
Discussion
This study provides experimental evidence that surgeons
exhibit inattentional blindness while performing tasks. It
Table 1 Differences in accuracy, detection of unexpected ﬁndings, and task completion time between the randomization groups
Group A
Group B
p Value
Standard endoscopy
Augmented reality
Subjects
Total (n = 32)
17
15
0.98 Likelihood ratio
PGY 1, 2 (n = 8)
4
4
PGY 3–5 (n = 13)
7
6
Fellows/surgeons (n = 11)
6
5
Accuracy (mm from target)
Median (IQR)
4.13 (3.11–7.39)
2.10 (1.29–2.37)
\0.001 Mann–Whitney U test
Complication noted
Yes
7
0
0.008 Fisher’s exact test
No
10
15
Foreign body noted
Yes
7
0
0.008 Fisher’s exact test
No
10
15
Screw noted
Yes
7
1
0.04 Fisher’s exact test
No
10
14
Either ﬁnding noted
Yes
12
1
\0.001 Fisher’s exact test
No
5
14
Time to complete task (s)
Median (IQR)
25 (21–30)
19 (12–31.5)
0.15 Mann–Whitney U test
IQR interquartile range
Surg Endosc (2013) 27:454–461
457
123


also demonstrates that recognition of signiﬁcant unex-
pected ﬁndings can be markedly reduced when AR is used
to enhance navigation.
Despite the expansion of minimally invasive techniques,
image-guided procedures, and telerobotic surgery, the
potential detrimental effects of advanced displays, includ-
ing AR, are poorly explored in the medical literature. Some
studies of anesthesia have examined the pros and cons of
head-mounted AR displays for monitoring purposes, but
investigation in other ﬁelds is sparse [18, 19]. Although
perceptual issues with medical AR are well documented
[20], we believe this is the ﬁrst experiment to demonstrate
that augmented surgical navigation systems have a poten-
tially deleterious attentional cost. This has implications for
the use and development of all image-guided procedures.
In our study, on-screen navigation improved accuracy,
and there was a trend toward faster task completion. A trial
investigating navigation on an airport surface in reduced
visibility showed similar results. The addition of an aug-
mented display resulted in more accurate navigation, faster
route completion, and decreased pilot task workloads [21].
Emulating such advances in a medical context clearly is
appealing because of its potential for a safer, more efﬁcient
procedure, with less demand on the physician.
Our data support other authors who suggest that such
gains may be achievable for medical procedures [11, 22, 23]
but that safe implementation will require some mitigation of
attentional costs. The presence of inattentional blindness
during performance of a surgical task was expected, given
the results from similar studies investigating visual percep-
tion. Even so, when we were designing this experiment, it
seemed inconceivable that surgeons would miss ﬁndings so
clearly visible within the operative ﬁeld.
One famous example of inattentional blindness is collo-
quially termed the ‘‘invisible gorilla.’’ In this example, a
person in a gorilla costume is clearly present on a monitor
that the subjects are viewing while focused on a task [13].
Amazingly, during one condition, 58 % of the subjects miss
the gorilla. Similarly, 59 % of our ‘‘task-focused’’ control
arm failed to notice the screw although it would have been
difﬁcult to place it any closer to the target point (Fig. 1A).
Perhaps of greater signiﬁcance, no one in the AR group
noted the complication, and only one subject saw the
screw. Military and aviation studies have previously doc-
umented similar drawbacks when investigating AR and
head-up displays. The term ‘‘attentional tunneling’’ is used
to describe cognitive ﬁxation on speciﬁc cues and the
resulting cost of neglecting alternative information or tasks
[24]. This phenomenon has been implicated in the Three
Mile Island nuclear accident [24], F16 mishaps in the U.S.
Air Force [25], and cell phone-related car accidents [26,
27]. In a military simulation, detection of unexpected but
‘‘highest priority’’ objects was reduced when they were
closely presented adjacent to cued (with AR) targets [15].
The participant’s attention was therefore drawn to the
highlighted object although the noncued item nearby was
of greater importance.
Attentional constraints
have
been shown to limit
severely a pilot’s ability to process real-world and aug-
mented display information simultaneously [28]. Head-up
display symbolism may support precision landing, but
attraction to the displayed image has led attention away
from runway incursions [29], resulting in reduced detection
of ﬂight path objects as salient as a blimp [30].
Because we did not analyze eye movements, we are
unable to determine whether failure to note the unexpected
objects resulted from failure to scan the area or failure to
perceive. Radiologic studies suggest that both occur and
explain the ‘‘satisfaction of search’’ phenomenon whereby
secondary abnormalities are missed on imaging studies.
Greater attention, measured by gaze dwell time, is given
to contrast-enhanced regions of a radiograph than to
Fig. 2 A Three-dimensional (3D) virtual view displaying the points
located by the control group (magenta) and the augmented reality
(AR) group (blue). The reference target point is in yellow (partially
obscured). The AR group was more accurate (p \ 0.001). B The 3D
data points from A are shown projected onto a sagittal computed
tomography (CT) image for anatomic reference
458
Surg Endosc (2013) 27:454–461
123


noncontrast regions, leading to missed abnormalities [31].
This differs from other studies of eye position during
radiograph interpretation, which indicated that the effect is
based on failure to recognize [32]. The addition of com-
puter-aided diagnosis in medical imaging has been shown
to reduce the visual search for noncued abnormalities [33].
The differences between our randomization groups suggest
that AR has an effect similar to contrast on an imaging
study. Secondary ﬁndings are overlooked due to an atten-
tional shift toward a highlighted area.
In addition to attentional tunneling, the clutter caused by
on-screen cues provides another explanation for the infe-
rior detection of unexpected ﬁndings. As more and more
information is displayed within one’s visual ﬁeld, the costs
of clutter begin to outweigh the costs of scanning [34, 35].
In a procedural context, this suggests that a point is reached
at which viewing imaging data away from the operative
ﬁeld in a traditional manner may be safer and faster than
interpreting information-rich data within the ﬁeld despite
the inherent shift of attention. Clutter and jitter induced by
AR may reduce the user’s effective visual acuity [36]. We
believe there may be an additional camouﬂage effect, as
evidenced by the difﬁculty seeing the optic nerve when it is
fused with the red carotid artery contour (Fig. 1B).
Given our ﬁndings, we caution any claims in the medical
literature that advanced navigational displays inevitably
lead to safer, easier, and more precise surgery. Technical
development in many disciplines has been impressive,
including the introduction of live AR through continuous
low-dose CT scanning, AR assistance for remote neurosur-
gical assistance, fused video-ultrasound images for partial
nephrectomy, AR-assisted navigation during natural oriﬁce
translumenal endoscopic surgery (NOTES), and overlay AR
during robotic surgery [4, 5, 11, 12, 37]. Reporting of this
progress remains focused on registration accuracy, and
perhaps rightly so given that it is absolutely essential for
reliable navigation. However, registration error represents
only one among many potential detrimental effects of AR,
which include attention shifts; behavioral effects of reliance,
complacency, and trust; impact of automation failure; and
processing of noncued targets and cued nontargets [15, 16,
38]. In light of these other potential hazards, further inves-
tigation into interface design is required.
The sample size in the current study was relatively
small, but it would be challenging to ﬁnd a greater number
of surgeons with varying levels of experience to participate
and perform such speciﬁc and surgically relevant tasks in
a realistic environment. Similar human factors studies
investigating skilled end-users’ use of technology have
been equally limited in subjects [16, 30, 34].
A single cadaveric specimen was used. Although indi-
vidual anatomic variations exist, we doubt that this would
signiﬁcantly affect the results.
We believe the greatest factor limiting interpretation of
these results is that none of the participants had experience
with operative AR. We are not sure whether lack of
familiarity
affected
outcome.
Perhaps
the
difference
between the groups would have been insigniﬁcant if they
had been given time to use the system and get used to the
display.
On-screen AR could potentially be presented in various
formats, and we investigated only one setting. It could be
argued that an alternative view, such as a wire mesh
overlay rather than solid contours or a reduced contour
opacity, could limit or negate the effect demonstrated. The
unknown effect of habituation on the system (learning
curve) and the possibility of alternative views highlight the
need for further research into display settings and feedback
mechanisms.
Despite these limitations, our ﬁndings correlate closely
with results in other industries. Thus, we believe the effect
demonstrated does exist. Potential methods to reduce in-
attentional blindness that require further investigation
include on-demand rather than full-time AR, clutter
reduction, soniﬁcations (informative auditory feedback)
[39], and a perceptually matched 3D virtual view on a
submonitor.
Although the task chosen for the trial was designed to
focus attention, it is important to remember that the only
parameter that differed between the groups was the display
setting. On-screen cuing appears to have a far greater
impact on detection of unexpected ﬁndings than either
experience level or time spent on the task. Despite the
attentional costs, we see enormous potential beneﬁts from
real-time navigation, and we are actively engaged in
addressing the issues of attention and distraction.
Our attentional capacity is limited, and we focus it for
good reason; many tasks require concentration, and unex-
pected events are rare. Thus, quarantining a portion of our
attention for unexpected events is wasteful in most cir-
cumstances and probably impossible anyway. Instead, we
suggest that surgeons need to be aware of the potential
detrimental effects from additional stimuli while perform-
ing procedures as advanced displays continue to be adopted
into practice. Procedures and subtasks with high naviga-
tional demand should be targeted, and systems should be
customized to mitigate distractive cues when demand is
low. Emphasis needs to be placed on the perceptual limi-
tations of the task-focused end user. Therefore, it is
essential that physicians play a role in the development of
these systems.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Karl Storz, Endoscopy Can-
ada, and Medtronic of Canada for providing the wet lab dissection
instruments and devices. The prototype cone-beam CT C-arm was
developed in collaboration with Siemens Healthcare. This study could
not have been performed without assistance from the staff at the
Surg Endosc (2013) 27:454–461
459
123


University of Toronto Surgical Skills Centre, Mount Sinai Hospital,
Toronto. This work was supported by the Guided Therapeutics (GTx)
Program at the University Health Network, including the Kevin and
Sandra Sullivan Chair in Surgical Oncology, the Hatch Engineering
Fellowship Fund, the RACH Fund, and the Princess Margaret Hos-
pital Foundation.
Disclosures
Benjamin J. Dixon, Michael J. Daly, Harley Chan,
Allan D. Vescan, Ian J. Witterick, and Jonathan C. Irish have no
conﬂicts of interest or ﬁnancial ties to disclose.
References
1. Cleary K, Peters TM (2010) Image-guided interventions: tech-
nology review and clinical applications. Annu Rev Biomed Eng
12:119–142
2. Strauss G, Koulechov K, Rottger S, Bahner J, Trantakis C, Hofer
M, Korb W, Burgert O, Meixensberger J, Manzey D, Dietz A,
Luth T (2006) Evaluation of a navigation system for ENT with
surgical efﬁciency criteria. Laryngoscope 116:564–572
3. Nithiananthan S, Brock KK, Daly MJ, Chan H, Irish JC,
Siewerdsen JH (2009) Demons deformable registration for
CBCT-guided procedures in the head and neck: convergence and
accuracy. Med Phys 36:4755–4764
4. Shekhar R, Dandekar O, Bhat V, Philip M, Lei P, Godinez C,
Sutton E, George I, Kavic S, Mezrich R, Park A (2010) Live
augmented reality: a new visualization method for laparoscopic
surgery using continuous volumetric computed tomography. Surg
Endosc 24:1976–1985
5. Cheung CL, Wedlake C, Moore J, Pautler SE, Peters TM (2010)
Fused video and ultrasound images for minimally invasive partial
nephrectomy: a phantom study. Med Image Comput Comput
Assist Interv 13(Pt 3):408–415
6. Siewerdsen JH, Daly MJ, Chan H, Nithiananthan S, Hamming N,
Brock KK, Irish JC (2009) High-performance intraoperative
cone-beam CT on a mobile C-arm: an integrated system for
guidance of head and neck surgery. Proc SPIE 7261(1):72610J
7. Daly MJ, Chan H, Nithiananthan S, Qiu J, Barker E, Bachar G,
Dixon BJ, Irish JC, Siewerdsen JH (2011) Clinical implementa-
tion of intraoperative cone-beam CT in head and neck surgery.
Proc SPIE 7964:796426
8. Daly MJ, Chan H, Prisman E, Vescan A, Nithiananthan S, Qiu J,
Weersink R, Irish JC, Siewerdsen JH (2010) Fusion of intraop-
erative cone-beam CT and endoscopic video for image-guided
procedures. Proc SPIE 7625:762503
9. Azuma RT (1997) A survey of augmented reality. In presence:
teleoperators and virtual environments 4:355–385
10. Teber D, Guven S, Simpfendorfer T, Baumhauer M, Guven EO,
Yencilek F, Gozen AS, Rassweiler J (2009) Augmented reality: a
new tool to improve surgical accuracy during laparoscopic partial
nephrectomy? Preliminary in vitro and in vivo results. Eur Urol
56:332–338
11. Volonte F, Pugin F, Bucher P, Sugimoto M, Ratib O, Morel P
(2011) Augmented reality and image overlay navigation with
OsiriX in laparoscopic and robotic surgery: not only a matter of
fashion. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci 18(4):506–509
12. Fernandez-Esparrach G, San Jose Estepar R, Guarner-Argente C,
Martinez-Palli G, Navarro R, Rodriguez de Miguel C, Cordova
H, Thompson CC, Lacy AM, Donoso L, Ayuso-Colella JR, Gines
A, Pellise M, Llach J, Vosburgh KG (2010) The role of a com-
puted tomography-based image registered navigation system for
natural oriﬁce transluminal endoscopic surgery: a comparative
study in a porcine model. Endoscopy 42:1096–1103
13. Simons DJ, Chabris CF (1999) Gorillas in our midst: sustained
inattentionalblindnessfordynamicevents.Perception28:1059–1074
14. Carswell CM, Clarke D, Seales WB (2005) Assessing mental
workload during laparoscopic surgery. Surg Innov 12:80–90
15. Yeh M, Wickens CD (2001) Display signaling in augmented
reality: effects of cue reliability and image realism on attention
allocation and trust calibration. Hum Factors 43:355–365
16. Maltz M, Shinar D (2003) New alternative methods of analyzing
human behavior in cued target acquisition. Hum Factors 45:281–295
17. Yushkevich PA, Piven J, Hazlett HC, Smith RG, Ho S, Gee JC,
Gerig G (2006) User-guided 3D active contour segmentation of
anatomical structures: signiﬁcantly improved efﬁciency and
reliability. Neuroimage 31:1116–1128
18. Liu D, Jenkins SA, Sanderson PM (2009) Patient monitoring with
head-mounted displays. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 22:796–803
19. Liu D, Jenkins SA, Sanderson PM, Fabian P, Russell WJ (2010)
Monitoring with head-mounted displays in general anesthesia: a
clinical evaluation in the operating room. Anesth Analg 110:
1032–1038
20. Sielhorst T, Feuerstein M, Navab N (2008) Advanced medical
displays: a literature review of augmented reality. J Display
Technol 4:451–467
21. McCann RS, Foyle DC, Andre AD, Battiste V (1996) Advanced
navigation aids in the ﬂight deck: effects on ground taxi perfor-
mance under low visibilty conditions. SAE Transact J Aerospace
105:1419–1430
22. Marescaux J, Rubino F, Arenas M, Mutter D, Soler L (2004)
Augmented-reality-assisted laparoscopic adrenalectomy. JAMA
292:2214–2215
23. Kawamata T, Iseki H, Shibasaki T, Hori T (2002) Endoscopic
augmented reality navigation system for endonasal transsphe-
noidal surgery to treat pituitary tumors: technical note. Neuro-
surgery 50:1393–1397
24. Wickens CD (2005) Attentional tunneling and task management:
Technical Report AHFD-05-23/NASA-05-10. University of Illi-
nois, Urbana-Champaign
25. Shappell SA, Wiegmann DA (2003) A human error analysis of
general aviation controlled ﬂight into terrain accidents occurring
between 1990–1998. Final Rep. DOT/FAA/AM-03/4. Ofﬁce of
Aerospace Medicine, Washington, DC
26. Strayer DL, Johnston WA (2001) Driven to distraction: dual-task
studies of simulated driving and conversing on cellular telephone.
Psychol Sci 12:462–466
27. Horrey WJ, Wickens CD (2006) Examining the impact of cell
phone conversations on driving using meta-analytic techniques.
Hum Factors 48:196–205
28. McCann RS, Foyle DC, Johnston JC (1993) Attentional limita-
tions with head-up displays. In: Jensen RS (ed) Proceedings of
the Seventh International Symposium on Aviation Psychology
1993, Colombus, pp 70–75
29. Fischer E, Haines RF, Price TA (1980) Cognitive issues in head-
up displays. NASA Technical paper 1711. NASA Ames Research
Center, Moffat Field
30. Wickens CD, Alexander AL, Horrey WJ, Nunes A, Hardy TJ
(2004) Trafﬁc and ﬂight guidance depiction on a synthetic vision
system display: the affects of clutter on performance and visual
attention allocation. In: Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting
of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, Santa Monica,
pp 218–222
31. Berbaum KS, Franken EA Jr, Dorfman DD, Miller EM,
Krupinski EA, Kreinbring K, Caldwell RT, Lu CH (1996) Cause
of satisfaction of search effects in contrast studies of the abdo-
men. Acad Radiol 3:815–826
32. Samuel S, Kundel HL, Nodine CF, Toto LC (1995) Mechanism
of satisfaction of search: eye position recordings in the reading of
chest radiographs. Radiology 194:895–902
460
Surg Endosc (2013) 27:454–461
123


33. Berbaum KS, Caldwell RT, Schartz KM, Thompson BH, Franken
EA Jr (2007) Does computer-aided diagnosis for lung tumors
change satisfaction of search in chest radiography? Acad Radiol
14:1069–1076
34. Yeh M, Merlo JL, Wickens CD, Brandenburg DL (2003) Head-
up versus head-down: the costs of imprecision, unreliability, and
visual clutter on cue effectiveness for display signaling. Hum
Factors 45:390–407
35. Ververs PM, Wickens CD (1998) Head-up displays: effects of
clutter, display intensity, and display location on pilot perfor-
mance. Int J Aviat Psychol 8:377–403
36. Livingston MA (2005) Evaluating human factors in augmented
reality systems. IEEE Comput Graph Appl 25:6–9
37. Shenai MB, Dillavou M, Shum C, Ross D, Tubbs RS, Shih A,
Guthrie BL (2011) Virtual interactive presence and augmented
reality (VIPAR) for remote surgical assistance. Neurosurgery
68(1 Suppl operative):200–207; discussion 207
38. Lee JD, See KA (2004) Trust in automation: designing for
appropriate reliance. Hum Factors 46:50–80
39. Sanderson PM, Liu D, Jenkins SA (2009) Auditory displays in
anesthesiology. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 22:788–795
Surg Endosc (2013) 27:454–461
461
123


