SPECIAL ISSUE
The application of in-vehicle systems for elderly drivers
Amy Weihong Guo & Jenny F. Brake &
Simon J. Edwards & Phil T. Blythe &
Richard G. Fairchild
Received: 30 April 2010 /Accepted: 23 September 2010 /Published online: 10 October 2010
# The Author(s) 2010. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract
Purpose In response to the rapidly ageing global popula-
tion, the purpose of this paper is to identify the problems of
elderly drivers and their relation to emerging in-vehicle
technologies.
Methods The method is three fold. Firstly, it reviews factors
involved in the functional decline of elderly drivers.
Secondly, it assesses the feedback and support capabilities
of in-vehicle systems (IVSs) with the potential to assist
elderly people to drive safely for longer and maintain their
quality of life. Lastly, it describes a newly funded project,
Social inclusion through Digital Economy (SiDE), which
will demonstrate an innovative application of driving
simulator technology to test and evaluate the impact of
emerging invehicle systems on elderly drivers. This project
intends to assess whether it makes them less vulnerable
road users.
Conclusion The paper concludes that IVSs providing
feedback and support to elderly drivers have the potential
to help them recognize their weakness and vulnerability as
road users and improve their driving performance through
the use of advice, alerts, warnings or active interventions.
Keywords Elderly driver. Vulnerable road user. Driver
feedback . Driver support . In-vehicle system
1 Introduction
In the UK, the ageing segment of the population is growing
more rapidly than other age groups. The population of the
current state pensionable age is expected to rise by 32%
over the next 25 years from 11.8 million in 2008 to 15.6
million in 2033; and the number of people over 85 years is
projected to more than double over the next 25 years from
1.3 million in 2008 to 3.3 million by 2033. The proportion
of people aged 65 years and over is projected to increase
from 16% in 2008 to 23% by 2033 [1]. In Europe, the
number of elderly people has tripled over the last 50 years
and will more than triple again over the next 50 year period
[2]. The same trend is echoed in Canada, USA, Japan and
the rest of the developed world. Meanwhile, the number of
female elderly drivers has also increased dramatically in the
last decade as more of these women started driving in later
adulthood or became widowed, divorced or separated and
did not have another driver available in the household [3,
4]. This trend will continue in the future and lead to a more
even gender distribution among elderly drivers than in the
past. These statistics show that the proportion of elderly
drivers, particularly female elderly drivers, as a part of the
driving population will increase globally and therefore
special, targeted care for this segment of drivers should be
identified and addressed.
Research suggests that elderly drivers are less accurate
in judging speed and distance and have more difficulty
with multi-tasking [5, 6]. Robertson and Vanlaar [7] report
that in Canada elderly drivers account for 16% of road
deaths and 7.8% of injuries—the second largest behind the
15–24 years group. The same study highlights a rate of
15.7 deaths per 100,000 for the 65 years and over group
compared to a rate of 24.7 deaths per 100,000 of the
population in the 15–24 years group and 9.6 in the 24–
A. W. Guo (*): J. F. Brake: S. J. Edwards: P. T. Blythe:
R. G. Fairchild
TORG, School of Civil Engineering & Geosciences,
Newcastle University,
Cassie Building,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU, UK
e-mail: weihong.guo@ncl.ac.uk
Eur. Transp. Res. Rev. (2010) 2:165–174
DOI 10.1007/s12544-010-0037-y


65 years age group [7]. Li et al. [8] show that whilst the
number of deaths per driver involved in crashes in the
United States is lowest for those aged 16–19 years, it rises
by almost fivefold for drivers aged over 80 years.
However, in the same study, a measure of fragility can
be found by comparing the number of road deaths per
number of drivers involved in a crash (a measure of risk)
and excessive crash involvement (i.e. drivers involved in
crashes per vehicle-miles travelled (VMT)) showed that
the rate of drivers involved in crashes per VMT was
highest for those aged 16–19 years and falls rapidly until
the 70–74 years age group when it rises again. Thus,
although the under 24 years age group has a larger crash
risk than the over 65 years age group, the over 65 group
drives comparatively fewer miles than the under 24 age
group, but are more likely to suffer more serious or even
fatal injuries, thereby having a higher measure of fragility
and vulnerability. Furthermore, elderly drivers also have a
problem with maintaining a constant vehicle speed [9].
McGwin et al., [10] showed that for drivers aged
65 years and older, the at-fault crash rate was 2.1 times
higher for drivers who had been involved in a crash in the
previous 4 years compared to those who had not, herefore
an elderly person who has had a recent crash is more likely
to have another one. This study also determined that at-fault
drivers more often rated their driving as average or worse
compared to not at-fault drivers. Habitual hazardous and
critical errors highlighted in an Australian on-road driving
assessment study of elderly drivers (aged between 60–
86 years) showed that failing to check the blind spot,
observe intersections and make critical observations (i.e.
‘failure to observe critical features of the driving environ-
ment that compromised safety including pedestrians on
crossings, vehicles entering the flow of traffic, critical
traffic signs or road markings’) were in the top four
reported errors by the assessors [11]. Physical intervention
by the instructors resulting from critical driving errors were
primarily committed by drivers negotiating intersections,
along with failures in observations, gap selection and
vehicle positioning [11].
Breker et al. [3] considered that elderly drivers are not
often accident prone for the following reasons: they have a
lower proportion of alcohol use when driving, use
restraints more frequently and do not show signs of losing
control over the vehicle in curves and straight sections.
However, they are often involved in accidents at an
intersection where fast information processing and quick
reactions are required. AGILE (Aged people Integration,
mobility, safety and quality of Life Enhancement through
driving), a project funded by the European Commission
Research Programme ‘Quality of Life’ Key Action ‘The
Ageing Population’, conducted a survey with drivers in
three age groups (55–64, 65–74, 75+) in 2001. The results
indicate that the older the age group the person is in, the
more often he/she is the following: the main driver in the
household, legally responsible for accidents occurring
recently, drives fewer miles monthly and is less open to
external support such as special training and consultation
courses [3]. Gender differences are also found in driving
behaviour. Compared to male elderly drivers, female
elderly drivers tend to drive fewer mileages; have less
driving experience both quantitatively and qualitatively;
and are less often involved in or responsible for accidents
[3, 4].
However, driving plays an important and essential role
in maintaining elderly people’s mobility and independent
living, enabling them to participate in their usual social
activities and carry out practical day-to-day needs [7, 12–
14]. From a psychological perspective, driving makes
them feel younger, more confident and independent, whilst
mobility increases their feeling of control, self-esteem,
protection and prestige, enhances their status and helps
them participate in work, education or social events and
develop cognitive skills. Asking for lifts and the use of
public transport could be alternatives to driving. However,
UK Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC)
research found that older people are exceedingly reluctant
to ask family members or friends for lifts, even to hospital
or doctor’s appointments, unless some kind of reciprocal
relationship is involved [15]. Gilhooly [15], AgeUK [16]
and Brake [17–19] indicate that barriers to using public
transport may exist, such as being physically inaccessi-
ble; a lack of covered waiting areas and toilets; the
perception of being unsafe and unreliable, expensive and
inconvenient; whilst very often services such as hospitals
and cheaper out of town shopping centres are poorly
served by public transport. In addition, many elderly
people are not able to walk the required distance, stand
for a long time or have the overall physical endurance to
use public transport. Given that both car ownership and
driving appear to be related to a higher quality of life,
giving up driving can lead to reduced mobility, lack of
freedom, loss of independence, unmet social and aesthet-
ic needs, lower quality of life and eventually depression
and isolation [12, 15].
This paper reviews factors involved in the functional
decline of elderly drivers which is well-documented as
the main cause of reduced driving ability. It goes on to
assess the feedback and support capabilities of IVSs with
the potential to assist elderly people to drive safely for
longer and maintain their quality of life. Lastly, it
describes a newly funded project, Social inclusion
through Digital Economy (SiDE), which will demonstrate
an innovative application of driving simulator technology
to test and evaluate the impact on elderly drivers of
emerging IVSs.
166
Eur. Transp. Res. Rev. (2010) 2:165–174


2 Functional decline of elderly drivers
Age-related functional decline in physical health (especially
mobility, sight and hearing) and mental health can impact
on driving ability and lead to misjudgements and errors
whilst driving. Elderly people suffering from a decline in
physical health—such as stiffer muscles, limited neck and
upper body rotation and loss of upper limb strength—can
affect their ability to move and operate the car safely [7, 20,
21]. People suffering from a decline in visual health such as
blurred vision and photophobia can experience problems
with distance vision and sensitivity to light and glare [20,
22, 23]. Age-related functional decline can also be caused
by other medical issues including a stroke, heart disease or
medications prescribed to treat a specific ailment or other
illness [10, 12, 20, 22, 24]. People suffering from a decline
in mental health, such as loss of confidence, memory,
concentration and capability to process information, can be
more susceptible to distraction, find it difficult to perform
multi-tasking and difficult to understand road signs and
travel information displayed on the dashboard [12, 20, 22,
25].
In order to compensate for functional decline, elderly
drivers tend to drive less: this is possible as they no longer
need to commute and travel to work after retirement [12,
26–28]. They deliberately avoid driving at night, in poor
road conditions or other risky situations and places such as
wet roads, rush hours, heavy traffic, unfamiliar roads and
localities, bad weather or damaged roads: these practices all
contribute to a reduction in the annual mileage driven [27,
29, 30]. They display a coping mechanism for easing the
driving tasks by creating more time. This specific strategy
allows them to cope with a reduced capability to process
information and allows the task to be completed conscious-
ly rather than reactively [5, 31, 32]. This is usually achieved
by slowing down before a manoeuvre (such as turning to
cross a traffic lane). However, in certain situations, such as
entering a high speed motorway, slowing down is not an
effective coping mechanism and indeed it may contribute to
increasing the risk of an accident. This risky behaviour can
be compounded further by physical deficiencies such as
reduced neck rotation which can commonly lead to a loss in
ability to check the blind spot [11]. They also tend to avoid
right turns by taking routes that require left turns or routes
where right turns have green-arrow signals [33–35].
3 In-vehicle systems
3.1 Assistance needed to mitigate functional decline
In the literature there are several descriptions of elderly
drivers and driving behaviours that can adversely affect
driving or can limit the freedom to choose when to drive.
Table 1, adapted from Davidse [31], shows a summary of
the functional decline affecting elderly drivers and the
assistance needed to overcome this functional decline.
From this type of information it is possible to begin to
scope out the features of assistance systems for elderly
drivers.
As discussed earlier, the decline in capability of elderly
drivers has contributed to the fact that—compared to
middle aged drivers—elderly drivers are more often
involved in traffic accidents, killed or seriously injured in
accidents which involve other vehicles. Studies of individ-
ual developed countries in Europe, Asia and North America
[36–39] document that elderly drivers do not represent an
excessive risk or a threat to other road users. They are more
likely to hurt themselves than to put others at risk. Hence,
improving their driving performance has the potential to
enhance their safety on the road and benefit the transport
network as a whole.
In-vehicle assistive technologies are available to
address elderly drivers’ functional decline and avoidable
behaviours, assist elderly drivers with their driving
activities and increase road safety. Rakotonirainy and
Steinhardt [40] report that new in-vehicle technology
could improve safety and comfort as well as maintain
elderly people’s mobility for longer. Musselwhite and
Haddad [12] point out that older people are quite willing
to accept in-vehicle technology that helps their driving,
with a slight preference for those that provide feedback
rather than reduce workload.
3.2 In-vehicle system capabilities: driver feedback
and support
A distinction is made between driver feedback and driver
support. Driver feedback offers information (such as
location, fuel consumption and the frequency of lane
deviation) whereas driver support makes it possible to
improve performance based on the information available
through feedback (e.g. a better route, how to reduce fuel
consumption, how to make fewer lane deviations). Driver
support can be in the form of advice, an alert or a warning,
or even active intervention. Different IVSs will offer one or
more of these capabilities.
In-vehicle navigation systems (IVNS) are common
applications using feedback and support. They use a
Geographic Information System (GIS), which combines a
map and a database, and a satellite navigation system such
as Global Positioning System (GPS) [41]. Currently, IVNS
typically uses a GPS-enabled device to acquire position
data to give feedback by locating the vehicle on the map
displayed to the user. Each GPS-enabled device needs to
receive signals from at least four satellites to calculate its
Eur. Transp. Res. Rev. (2010) 2:165–174
167


position in three dimensions, therefore an unobstructed
view of the sky is required. This means that signal loss and/
or multipath error occurs often in urban canyons or tunnels.
A dead reckoning technique (a method of determining
position by making an educated guess based on last known
position, speed, time and direction), using a gyroscope and
an accelerometer is applied to enhance the reliability of
IVNS. A system using satellite based, mobile based and
wireless technologies was successfully tested in Newcastle
during the ASK-IT project (Ambient intelligence system of
agents for knowledge-based and integrated services for
mobility impaired users, funded by the EU 6th Framework
IST programme) to provide both indoor and outdoor
location-based services to disabled and elderly people
[42]. A future system which integrates GPS with current
technologies as well as the forthcoming Galileo system (a
European Civil Satellite Navigation system launched by the
European Council in 2002) will be able to provide a fully
connected and pervasive IVNS.
According to Burns [43] and Goodman et al. [44], IVNS
have the potential to maintain elderly drivers’ mobility and
hence independence and quality of life. For example, they
can offer support in the form of advice by providing
distance information to identify the location of forthcoming
manoeuvres [45], which creates more time for elderly
drivers to prepare for the manoeuvres. They help elderly
drivers when they travel in an unfamiliar area, where they
are often reluctant to travel [45, 46]. It also allows elderly
drivers in the early stages of dementia to locate themselves
and guide them back home when they are lost, even in a
familiar area [47]. However, a safety concern with IVNS
using relatively complex visual displays is raised for elderly
drivers by Mourant et al. (2001) and May et al. [45]. Also,
an age-related decline in learning environment layout (e.g.
route selection, scene recognition, distance ranking and
map placement) is identified by Kirasic [48] and Moffat et
al. [49]. Nevertheless, Guo [46] points out that using
snapshots (photographic images) of landmarks for naviga-
tion is welcomed by people of all ages. Goodman et al. [44]
discovered that a navigation aid based around landmarks is
particularly useful for elderly people. May et al. [45] report
that the incorporation of landmarks in the turn-by-turn
instructions provided by a navigation system has improved
the confidence of elderly drivers in particular, because it
significantly reduced the time spent glancing on the visual
display. Therefore, the use of landmarks as navigation cues
can increase the effectiveness and safety of navigation
systems.
Connections to the vehicle controller area network bus
(CANbus) have allowed information relating to speed,
Functional decline
Assistance needed
Vision and hearing
Peripheral vision
Signalling objects that are located in the driver’s
blind spot
Night time visual acuity
Artificially lighting objects (other road users and
road design elements)
Sensitivity to glare
Prevent glare
Contrast sensitivity
Draw attention to approaching traffic
Colour vision
Degree of contrast
Motion perception
Draw attention to approaching traffic
Hearing
Audible cues to visual information display
Cognitive processing and decision making
Divided attention
Prioritisation of tasks and simplifying sequences
of tasks
Selective attention
Assist the driver in directing his/her attention to
relevant information
Speed of processing information and making
decisions
Provide prior knowledge on the next traffic situation
Performing tasks consciously
Provide prior knowledge on the next traffic situation
Physical changes
Flexibility of head and neck
Signalling objects that are located in the driver’s
blind spot
Manual dexterity and strength
Ergonomic design
Interaction with other road users
Performance under pressure of time
Provide prior knowledge on the next traffic situation
Insight in the behaviour of other road users
Draw attention to approaching traffic and
its behaviour
Table 1 Functional decline of
elderly drivers and assistance
needed (Source: adapted from
Davidse [31])
168
Eur. Transp. Res. Rev. (2010) 2:165–174


distance, time of trip, fuel consumption, electrical accessory
usage, and heating and ventilation usage to be gained. This
information is then used to provide feedback and support.
The existence of sensor technology, radio frequency
communication-based technology, ad-hoc communication,
positioning technology and video image processing tech-
nology enables extra information on the driving environ-
ment to be collected and interpreted. Examples of such
information are distance and/or speed from the vehicle
ahead, lateral position of the vehicle on the lane and degree
of visibility (e.g. day or night). Integrating them into in-
vehicle driver support systems should decrease human
errors, alert the driver as early as possible to an impending
danger, warn him/her if there is no driver reaction to the
first alert and actively assist or ultimately intervene in order
to avert the accident or mitigate its consequences [14, 41,
50, 51]. Warnings should be given in visual or audible
formats rather than vibrating format as elderly drivers are
less sensitive to vibration [52].
Driver support systems have the potential to address
either directly or indirectly the specific declines in
perceptual, cognitive and physical performance by
enabling a reduction in driver workload [41]. Neverthe-
less, it is important to allow elderly drivers to select when
and how much support they wish to receive, thereby
increasing user acceptance and subsequent willingness—
and capability—to improve their driving performance and
road safety [12]. A summary of these driver support
systems with the potential assistance to elderly drivers is
shown in Table 2.
3.3 In-vehicle system capabilities: methods of delivering
feedback and support
Feedback on and support for driving performance can be
delivered either in-vehicle (on a display) before, during and
at the end of the trip or off-vehicle (e.g. at home or on a
mobile digital device) at the convenience of the driver
through, for example, emails, websites, mobile phone text
messages or paper-based statements. However, Fairchild et
al. [53] have suggested that, for feedback to be effective,
advice to the driver must be timely and useful, enabling the
driver to take action that will improve driving performance
in one or more ways, e.g. at the point of the negative
behaviour being detected, but without causing a driving
hazard in safety critical situations; or after the event whilst
still in the car so that there is recent memory of the journey;
or off-vehicle, so that more detailed feedback and support
can be offered in a non-stressful environment. As many
elderly drivers are unaware of their decreased driving
performance or are less concerned about relevant issues
[7, 54], the use of driver feedback systems will provide
opportunities for them to recognise their weaknesses and
possibly adopt measures to tackle their diminished driving
performance.
One example of off-vehicle feedback is Fiat’s eco:Drive
system [55]. This measures the driving-style characteristics
of the driver which can be downloaded via a universal
serial bus (USB) drive. Data are analysed using a Fiat web
service when uploaded to the user’s home computer. The
user is then presented through their web browser with a
summary of feedback information such as journey cost and
estimated CO2 emissions, together with support in the form
of general tips for better driving.
Foot-LITE is a research project funded by the UK
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
(EPSRC). It seeks to deliver innovative driver/vehicle
interface systems and services to encourage sustained
changes to driving styles (to improve safety and eco-
driving) and wider travel behaviour (for example switching
to non-car modes) [53]. The Foot-LITE system targets
drivers from across the socio-economic spectrum and at all
levels of experience, making it an appropriate system for
use by elderly drivers. The system comprises an in-vehicle
device to provide immediate feedback to the driver on a full
colour screen that indicates the driving error or risky
behaviour that has occurred and provides support showing
how it may be corrected and avoided in the future. Further
in-vehicle feedback is provided at the end of a trip,
indicating journey length, cost (measured by the fuel used)
and emissions; it also offers support in the form of ‘lessons
to be learned’. Finally, statements sent out through the
internet at the users’ preset timing (e.g. weekly or monthly)
provide totals of measured driving factors such as fuel
consumption, the number of times a driving infringement
was committed, for that time period. It also provides a
comparison of how the driver is performing in terms of the
changes that have been made in driving style and their
impact on the cost of driving and vehicle emissions (which
could also increase as well as decrease) over a longer period
of time which encompasses multiple trips. Lastly, off-
vehicle web based support directs the driver to personalised
lessons that will show how to improve their driving style.
Driver performance is measured against pre-defined driving
standards. The Foot-LITE system has undergone simulator
trials fully instrumented vehicle trials and a three vehicle
prototype trial; the final field trial will be carried out on a
thirty vehicle test fleet.
A more advanced method of delivering feedback and
support is the head-up display (HUD). This is a transparent
display that presents critical and relevant information to the
driver without requiring him/her to look away from the road
(Fig. 1). A HUD can be used on forward displays, such as a
car windshield, or in rear view/wing mirrors. In March
2010, General Motors announced its new concept: an
enhanced vision system that builds upon conventional
Eur. Transp. Res. Rev. (2010) 2:165–174
169


HUD technology and displays important information across
the entire windshield using cameras and sensors placed
around the car (www.wired.com/autopia/2010/03/gm-next-
gen-heads-up-display).
As visual impairment is common in elderly people,
displaying road signs, speed limit data and traffic signs on
the HUD (with optional audible cues) could improve
elderly drivers’ road safety by enhancing the clarity of
road/traffic signs [40]. In addition, elderly drivers, who
need an early warning, due to a slower reaction time than
younger drivers, will have the chance to decide when they
want such information to be made available on the HUD.
This will give them enough time (usually longer than for
younger drivers) to perform the manoeuvres, before they
are able to see the actual sign. This is probably a more
effective alternative to ‘making road signs bigger to help
elderly drivers’, as suggested by Box et al. [56]. Moreover,
integrating the HUD into IVS has the potential to allow the
Table 2 Driver support systems for elderly drivers (Sources: European Commission [51]; Fairchild et al. [53])
Driver support systems
Assistance to elderly drivers
Adaptive Light Control (ALC)/Adaptive Front Lighting System (AFS)
Using lighting technology, sensor networks (and satellite
navigation systems in the future), ALC/AFS can adjust
the direction, width and depth of the headlamps’ light
automatically in reaction to the surroundings, type of road,
steering wheel angle, speed and movement of the vehicle.
Increase visibility at night time and bad weather; offer a better
view of the road ahead, including other vehicles and obstacles
in the distance.
Lane Departure Warning (LDW)
LDW is a forward-looking and vision-based system using
algorithms to interpret video images to estimate the
direction and lateral position and velocity of the vehicle
and lane width and road curvature.
Alert the driver to drive within the lane when deviation occurs.
Intersection Assistant
Intersection assistant monitors the traffic from the right,
road signs and the traffic signals at the intersections.
Via a wireless communication link, it provides the
driver with the status of the traffic lights and a
suggested speed to allow him/her to pass the
intersections safely.
Alert the driver to stop for the traffic from the right or offer
speed suggestions according to the road signs/traffic signals,
and then warn the driver if he/she performs inappropriately.
Lane Change Assistance (LCA) or Blind Spot Detection (BSD)
LCA or BSD continuously monitors the rear blind
spots on both sides of the vehicle.
Warn the driver visually/audibly to avoid overtaking in critical
situations.
Obstacle and Collision Warning (OCW)
Using radar sensors or video image processing or a
combination of them, OCW monitors the area in front
of the vehicle. OCW is proactive in terms of providing
full braking force, arming airbags or tightening the
seatbelt when needed.
Warn the driver when vehicles, cyclists, pedestrians or other
obstacles on the road ahead are detected; prepare the vehicle
for an imminent collision proactively to avoid the collision
and/or mitigate the severity.
Intelligent Speed Adaptation (ISA)
Using satellite navigation technology, sensor technology,
a road side beacon system and a central control system,
ISA constantly monitors vehicles and the local speed limit
on a road. ISA can be configured in two ways: advisory
ISA and voluntary ISA.
Help the driver maintain a safe speed by alerting the driver
(advisory ISA) or decelerating automatically in cooperation
with traffic management systems (voluntary ISA) when the
speed limit for a given road is exceeded.
Electronic Brake Assist System (EBS)
EBS can activate the maximum braking power immediately
and is triggered when the driver performs fast
and hard braking.
Take over the activity from the driver to avoid an accident or
decrease vehicle speed at the moment of collision in order
to reduce its seriousness.
Adaptive Cruise Control System(ACC)
Using a long range radar sensor, a signal processor and
longitudinal control of the vehicle, ACC constantly
monitors the speed of the vehicle and the distance to the
vehicle ahead. It will slow down the vehicle when needed
and accelerate automatically to the pre-selected speed whilst
maintaining the correct distance to the vehicle ahead without
requiring any action from the driver.
Take over the activity from the driver to keep a safe distance
from the vehicle ahead and avoid collision. The driver can
override the system at any time.
170
Eur. Transp. Res. Rev. (2010) 2:165–174


driver to remain focused on the environment outside the
vehicle while maintaining the situational awareness of the
relationship between the vehicle and the external objects by
offering the driver advice along with a bird’s eye view of
what is around the vehicle and the distances from them.
Campbell et al. [57] suggest that a higher sensitivity setting
of the interfaces should be available for elderly people
because they have poorer visual acuity and are less
sensitive to luminance contrasts.
4 Use of a driving simulator to evaluate the impact
of in-vehicle systems on elderly drivers
The history of driving simulators can be traced back to the
1920s when simulation was first used to evaluate the skill
and competence of public transport operators [58]. Since
then, driving simulators have been used to investigate the
parameters that govern driver choice and behaviour, driver
training and evaluation of vehicle design and technologies.
It was pointed out by Yang et al. [58] and Lee et al. [59]
that driving simulators give researchers full control of the
situational and environmental variables. Also, Breker et al.
[60] report that simulation makes it possible to conduct
tests in new ways that cannot be realised in real traffic
environments. This means that they can conduct observa-
tion and evaluation of driver performance and behaviour in
relation to the impacts of hypothetical road elements or
traffic events. This means that they can avoid potentially
hazardous on-road driving conditions and accompanying
legal restrictions that may be caused by experiments. It is
also a cost-effective alternative to on-road driving tests. The
main concern regarding research using driving simulators is
the validity of the results. In order to bring high fidelity
user experience to the study subjects, it is essential to
provide the subjects with the same sensory cues that they
experience in real world driving. However, this was not
possible in the past which led to misinterpretation of the
signals between the eye and the inner ear. Elderly subjects
often suffered motion sickness and had to terminate the
experiment early. Furthermore, an older person’s ability to
act in an unfamiliar technological environment might
influence driving performance in the simulator as moderat-
ing variable [60]. With the development of motion-cueing
algorithms, the current generation of driving simulators
(often in a form of the front half or all of a car) are
supported by the use of a sophisticated and interactive
motion-platform. This platform, which is integrated under-
neath the driving simulator, is able to provide an immediate
understanding of the motion of the vehicle in the simulated
world and a valid duplication of the real world driving
experience.
Driving simulator technology is being applied in the
Social inclusion through Digital Economy (SiDE) project.
This has been funded by the Research Councils’ UK Digital
Economy Programme for 5 years from October 2009.
Based at Newcastle University, SiDE will address four
fields where digital technologies and the building of a truly
inclusive digital economy could deliver major social
benefits: Connected Home and Community, Accessibility;
Inclusive Transport Services; and Creative Industries.
One of the key studies covered under Inclusive Transport
Services is to evaluate whether IVSs underpinned by
emerging technologies can assist elderly drivers to drive
safely for longer. To understand elderly drivers’ behaviour
in response to such IVSs, the SiDE project intends to
establish driver awareness of their driving capability—and
therefore their vulnerability as road users—which can then
be compared with their actual functional ability at a later
stage. This is different from the AGILE project which
focused on establishing an aetiological classification of
ageing-related illnesses associated with driving and acci-
dents and gathering knowledge of driver assessment, driver
training and traffic safety.
Fig. 1 Head-up displays (Source: www.lightblueoptics.com)
Eur. Transp. Res. Rev. (2010) 2:165–174
171


IVSs will then be tested using a driving simulator (as
described above) equipped with a suite of technologies,
including in-vehicle sensors (located on the pedals and
steering wheel), multiple cameras and projectors, eye
tracking and head movement systems and distributed ad-
hoc wireless networks. As seen in Section 3, each IVS has a
different set of capabilities which will be tested and
evaluated individually as well as the whole system. These
capabilities will be analysed according to the information
that is being delivered (e.g. navigation instructions, lane
departure, headway), the reactions made by the subjects
(such as braking, accelerating, entering an intersection or
high speed traffic) and the degree of personalisation and
tolerance of visual load that can be made by the user. After
each IVS has been evaluated, there will be a comparative
evaluation of all the systems.
Individual driver performance and attitudes to the IVSs
will be measured before and after the implementation of
each IVS into the driving simulator and its environment.
This will permit a sound understanding of the impacts on
individual elderly drivers and the scope for adopting these
systems. The output of this study will identify the most
appropriate combinations of in-vehicle capabilities; the
propensity for elderly drivers to adopt these systems; and
it will recommend ways of increasing the awareness of
elderly drivers about their vulnerability as road users and
how it may be overcome using IVSs. The research will also
help to identify personalised training needs for individual
elderly drivers and to enhance the elderly drivers’ under-
standing of the other drivers’ driving behaviour and inform
the development of new rules and traffic signs.
5 Conclusion
Elderly drivers are fragile and vulnerable on the road and
do not represent an excessive risk or threat to other road
users. They are more likely to hurt themselves than to put
others at risk. Meanwhile, some of they are more likely to
be involved in traffic accidents, be at fault, and are over-
represented in traffic fatalities due to age-related functional
decline. Also, the ageing population is growing fast
worldwide, which is likely to be accompanied by a rise in
age related accidents with an inevitable social and monetary
cost for society. Neglecting their need for safe driving will
lead to a decrease in their quality of life, loss of
independence and potentially a high rate of clinical
depression.
A review of IVSs suggests that providing feedback and
support to elderly drivers has the potential to enhance their
safety on the road and benefit the transport network as a
whole. Driver feedback offers information on elderly
drivers’ driving performance and helps them be aware of
the misjudgements or driving errors being made. Driver
support provides elderly drivers with timely and construc-
tive advice, alerts, warnings or even active interventions
which take over the activity from the driver to avoid
accidents or reduce the seriousness of the accidents. Driver
feedback and support can be delivered either in-vehicle
using head-up displays or off-vehicle using a home
computer or other personal mobile devices.
A newly funded research project, Social inclusion
through Digital Economy (SiDE) will evaluate the impact
of IVSs on elderly drivers’ driving performance to ascertain
whether such systems can assist elderly drivers to drive
safely for longer. SiDE will establish elderly drivers’
vulnerability as road users based on their awareness of
functional decline, and will test a suite of selected IVSs
using a driving simulator. It is anticipated that the SiDE
project will deliver a sound understanding of the impacts of
different systems on elderly drivers, the scope for adopting
individual systems or combinations of systems and the
individual training needs for safe driving for older drivers.
It will also help the elderly drivers’ understanding of the
other drivers’ driving behaviour and inform the develop-
ment of new rules and traffic signs.
Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which per-
mits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
References
1. ONS (2009) Population hub. 2009, Office of National Statistics.
Available from: http://www.statistics.gov.uk/hub/population/
index.html
2. OASIS (2007) Description of work. Seventh Framework
Programme Theme ICT-2007.7.1 ICT&Ageing
3. Breker S, Henriksson P, Eeckhout G, Falkmer T, Siren A,
Hakamies-Blomqvist L, Bekiaris E, Panou M, Leue E (2001)
Problems of elderly in relation tothe driving task and relevant
criticalscenarios. Report Number: AGILE Deliverable 1.1. Avail-
able from: <http://www.agile.iao.fraunhofer.de/indexi.html>
4. Oxley J, Charlton J, Scully J, Koppel S (2010) Older female
drivers: an emerging transport safety and mobility issue in
Australia. Accident Anal Prev 42(2):515–522, Available from:
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6V5S-4XJP5X5-
1/2/caeabc4b1e805b84b6fb79abc3e0d4c0>
5. Birren J, Fisher L (1995) Ageing and speed of behaviour: possible
consequences for psychological functioning. Annu Rev Psychol
46:25, Available from: <http://www.questia.com/googleScholar.qst;
jsessionid=LP8L9LjX2XCNpDGWGrd0WhXgPFHHpdn1v02Lxz
21FBvZvZ13D4hc!1205579298!-937560419?docId=5001644976>
6. Anderson DS (2004) Strategic planning for mature drivers:
foundations and strategies. Center for the Advancement of Public
Health MS 1F 5, Department of Health, Fitness and Recreation
Resources, Graduate School of Education
7. Robertson R, Vanlaar W (2008) Elderly drivers: future chal-
lenges? Accident Anal Prev 40(6):1982–1986
172
Eur. Transp. Res. Rev. (2010) 2:165–174


8. Li G, Braver ER, Chen L-H (2003) Fragility versus excessive
crash involvement as determinants of high death rates per vehicle-
mile of travel among older drivers. Accident Anal Prev 35
(2):227–235
9. Musselwhite C, Haddad H (2009) Using grounded theory to
elicit the driving needs of older people. In: International
conference on Inclusive Design, Royal College of Art, London,
UK 5–8, April. Available from: http://include09.kinetixevents.
co.uk/4dcgi/prog?sess=28893201042298616082009103543&
operation=detail&paper_id=44
10. McGwin G Jr, Sims RV, Pulley L, Roseman JM (2000) Relations
among chronic medical conditions, medications, and automobile
crashes in the elderly: a population-based case-control study pp 424–
431, Available from: http://aje.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/content/
abstract/152/5/424
11. Kay L, Bundy A, Clemson L, Jolly N (2008) Validity and
reliability of the on-road driving assessment with senior drivers.
Accident Anal Prev 40(2):751–759
12. Musselwhite C, Haddad H (2007) Prolonging the safe driving of
older people through technology. The Centre for Transport
&Society
13. Hakamies-Blomqvist L, Peters B (2000) Recent European
research on older drivers. Accident Anal Prev 32(4):601–607
14. van den Broek G, Cavallo F, Vehrmann C (2010) AALIANCE
ambient assisted living roadmap. AmbientIntelligence and smart
environment. Vol. 6. IOS Press BV, Amsterdam
15. Gilhooly M (2002) Transport and ageing: extending quality of life
via public and private transport. Available from: <http://www.
esrcsocietytoday.ac.uk/ESRCInfoCentre/Plain_English_Summaries/
environment/mobility/index150.aspx>
16. AgeUK (2008) Social inclusion and communities. Available from:
http://www.ageconcern.org.uk/AgeConcern/Documents/
AA_2008_Social_Inclusion.pdf
17. Brake JF (2008) Identifying appropriate options for delivering
urban transportation to older people. In: Urban transport confer-
ence. Malta
18. Brake JF (2008) Provision of transport for the disabled and elderly
people: taxicard—taxilink preference survey. Contract Report.
Nexus
19. Brake JF (2007) Evaluation of older people’s community transport
shopping pilot. Contract Report. Nexus
20. Dobbs BM (2005) Medical conditions and driving: a review of the
literature (1996–2000). National Highway Traffic Safety Admin-
istration, Washington
21. Alvarez FJ, Fierro I (2008) Older drivers, medical condition,
medical impairment and crash risk. Accident Anal Prev 40
(1):55–60
22. Charlton J, Koppel S, O’Hare M, Andrea D, Smith G, Khodr B,
Langford J, Odell M, Fildes B (2004) Influence of chronic illness
on crash involvement of motor vehicle drivers. Monash University
Accident Research Centre, Victoria, Australia, Available from:
<http://www.monash.edu.au/muarc/reports/muarc213.html>
23. Owsley C, McGwin G Jr, Sloane M, Wells J, Stalvey BT,
Gauthreaux S (2002) Impact of cataract surgery on motor vehicle
crash involvement by older adults. JAMA 288:9, Available from:
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12186601>
24. Lyman JM, McGwin G, Sims RV (2001) Factors related to driving
difficulty and habits in older drivers. Accident Anal Prev 33
(3):413–421
25. Lundberg C, Hakamies-Blomqvist L (2003) Driving tests with
older patients: effect of unfamiliar versus familiar vehicle. Transp
Res Part F Traffic Psychol Behav 6(3):163–173, Available from:
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6VN8-4979R1N-
1/2/f8a140c86a438c15d620ce2d6e22a3a6>
26. Hakamies-Blomqvist L, Wahlström B (1998) Why do older
drivers give up driving? Accident Anal Prev 30(3):305–312
27. Raitanen T, Törmäkangas T, Mollenkopf H, Marcellini F (2003)
Why do older drivers reduce driving? Findings from three
European countries. Transp Res Part F Traffic Psychol Behav 6
(2):81–95
28. Stutts JC, Stewart JR, Martell C (1998) Cognitive test perfor-
mance and crash risk in an older driver population. Accident Anal
Prev 30(3):337–346
29. Ball K, Owsley C, Stalvey B, Roenker DL, Sloane ME, Graves M
(1998) Driving avoidance and functional impairment in older
drivers. Accident Anal Prev 30(3):313–322
30. O’Neill D (1992) Physicians, elderly drivers, and dementia. Lancet
339(8784):41–43, Available from: <http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/B6T1B-49K0B4P-34D/2/923b6e2d21abba
789d5577e4e1242a75>
31. Davidse RJ (2006) Older drivers and ADAS—which systems
improve road safety? IATSS Res 30(1):6–20, Available from:
<http://iatss.or.jp/english/research/30-1/30-1-01.html> [Accessed
21/10/09]
32. de Waard D, Dijksterhuis C, Brookhuis KA (2009) Merging into
heavy motorway traffic by young and elderly drivers. Accident
Anal Prev 41(3):588–597
33. Hong I, Kurihara T, Iwasaki M (2008) Older drivers’ perceptions,
responses, and driving behaviours during complex traffic con-
ditions at a signalised intersection. In: IMechE 2008
34. Keskinen E, Ota H, Katila A (1998) Older drivers fail in
intersections: Speed discrepancies between older and younger
male drivers. Accident Anal Prev 30(3):323–330
35. Salisbury (2009) Positive Ageing Services, in home and commu-
nity care. City of Salisbury, Salisbury
36. Maycock G (1997) The safety of older car drivers in the European
Union. European Road Safety Federation, AA Foundation for
Road Safety Research, Basingstoke
37. Evgenikos P, Yannis G, Leitner T, Hoeglinger S, Broughton J,
Lawton B (2009) Road safety and the elderly in Europe. In: 4th
IRTAD Conference. Seoul, Korea, p 8
38. OECD (2001) Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD). Ageing and transport: mobility needs
and safety issues
39. Dulisse B (1997) Older drivers and risk to other road users.
Accident Anal Prev 29(5):573–582
40. Rakotonirainy A, Steinhardt D (2009) In-vehicle technology
functional requirements for older drivers. In: International
conference on automotive user interfaces and interactive vehicular
applications. ACM, Essen, Germany
41. Bekiaris E (2010) Transport telematics: ADAS & IVICS, from
concept to evaluation. Lecture Notes, Newcastle University
42. Edwards S, Fairchild R (2008) The UK pilot site—progress and
plans. In: Mobility for all—the use of ambient intelligence in
addressing the mobility needs of people with impairments: the
case of ASK-IT. Nuremberg, Germany, Available from: http://
www.ask-it.org/index.php?page=publications
43. Burns P (1999) Navigation and the mobility of older drivers. J
Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci 54B(1):S49–S55
44. Goodman J, Brewster SA, Gray P (2005) How can we best use
landmarks to support older people in navigation? Behav Inf
Technol 24(1):18
45. May A, Ross T, Osman Z (2005) The design of next generation
in-vehicle navigation systems for the older driver. Interact Comput
17(6):643–659
46. Guo AW (2009) Use of a new methodology to investigate the
effectiveness of a pervasive and intelligent future traveller
information system in encouraging public transport use. In:
School of civil engineering and geosciences. Newcastle Univer-
sity, Newcastle upon Tyne, p 323
47. Brittain K, Robinson L, Lindsay S, Olivier P (2007) Keeping in
touch everyday: findings of the scoping stage
Eur. Transp. Res. Rev. (2010) 2:165–174
173


48. Kirasic K (2000) Age differences in adults’ spatial abilities,
learning environmental layout and wayfinding behaviour. Spat
Cogn Comput 2(2):18
49. Moffat SD, Kennedy KM, Rodrigue KM, Raz N (2007) Extra-
hippocampal contributions to age differences in human spatial
navigation. Cereb Cortex 17(6):1274–1282. Oxford University Press
50. Bekiaris E, Stevens A (2005) Common risk assessment method-
ology for advanced driver assistance systems. Transp Rev 25(3):11
51. European_Commission (2010) i2010 intelligent car initiative,
Europe’s information society. European Commission (EC), Available
from: http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/activities/intelligentcar/
technologies/index_en.htm
52. NHTSA (2007) Traffic safety facts 2007 data: older population.
NHTSA, p 6
53. Fairchild R, Brake JF, Thorpe NT, Birrel SA, Young MS, Felstead
TJ, Fowkes M (2009) Using on-board driver feedback systems to
encourage safe, ecological and efficient driving: the Foot-LITE
project. In: The 23rd Convention of the Society for the Study of
Artificial Intelligence and Simulation of Behaviour. Edinburgh
54. Lesch MF, Hancock PA (2004) Driving performance during
concurrent cell-phone use: are drivers aware of their performance
decrements? Accident Anal Prev 36(3):471–480
55. Fiat (2009) Fiat eco:Drive [Online]. Published by: fiat. Available
from: <http://www.fiat.com/ecoDrive/> [Accessed 01/09/2009]
56. Box E, Gandolfi J, Mitchell K (2010) Maintaining safe mobility for the
ageing population: the role of the private car. Available from: <http://
www.racfoundation.org/assets/rac_foundation/content/down
loadables/maintaining%20safe%20mobility%20-%20rac%20foun
dation%20-%20140410%20-%20report.pdf> Accessed: [30/04/2010]
57. Campbell JL, Richard CM, Brown JL, McCallum M (2007) Crash
warning system interfaces: human factors insights and lessons
learned. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, January
58. Yang CY, Fricker JD, Kuczek T (1998) Designing advanced
traveller information systems for a driver’s perspective: results of
a driving simulation study. Transportation Research Record:
Journal of the Transportation Research Board 1621:7
59. Lee HC, Cameron D, Lee AH (2003) Assessing the driving
performance of older adult drivers: on-road versus simulated
driving. Accident Anal Prev 35(5):797–803
60. Breker S, Rothermel S, Verwey W, Henriksson P (2002) The role of
simulation in the assessment of older drivers. Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society/Europe Chapter Annual Meeting, Dortmund.
Available from: <http://www.agile.iao.fraunhofer.de/publications.
html>
174
Eur. Transp. Res. Rev. (2010) 2:165–174


