© 2009 The Psychonomic Society, Inc. 
404
Attention can be voluntarily directed to specific loca-
tions or objects in a scene, allowing us to process only 
the subset of information relevant to our current goals. 
However, in some cases, information not currently rel-
evant can capture attention. As a result, most accounts of 
attention postulate that both bottom-up (stimulus-driven) 
and top-down (goal-directed) factors compete to direct 
attention within a visual scene. It is generally accepted 
that attention can be deployed voluntarily, but whether or 
not attention can be captured in a purely stimulus-driven 
manner remains an open question (see Folk, Remington, 
& Johnston, 1992; Franconeri, Simons, & Junge, 2004).
Many dynamic stimuli appear to be capable of captur-
ing attention in a strictly stimulus-driven manner (Abrams 
& Christ, 2003; Franconeri & Simons, 2003; Theeuwes, 
1991; Yantis & Jonides, 1984). For example, the abrupt 
onset of a new object in a visual scene captures attention. 
Yantis and Jonides (1984) used an irrelevant feature search 
task to measure capture by abruptly appearing objects. 
Observers first viewed a placeholder array, which was 
followed by a search array containing a target letter and 
several distractors. Most of the letters in the search array 
were created by the disappearance (i.e., offset) of features 
from a placeholder, but one letter in the search array ap-
peared at a location not occupied by a placeholder; this 
item appeared abruptly as a new object whose features had 
not been present in the placeholder array. The target was 
no more likely to appear as an onset than as an offset, pro-
viding no incentive for giving onsets an attentional prior-
ity during search. Despite this, Yantis and Jonides (1984) 
reported shallower search slopes when the target was an 
onset, suggesting that the abruptly appearing onset items 
captured attention in a stimulus-driven manner.
Like onsets, offsets also appear to be capable of captur-
ing attention in a stimulus-driven manner in some situa-
tions. For instance, it has been demonstrated that during 
search, offsets can capture attention when accompanied 
by a luminance change, much as abrupt onsets accom-
panied by a change in luminance capture attention (e.g., 
Theeuwes, 1991). Pratt and McAuliffe (2001) showed 
that both onset and offset peripheral cues presented in 
isolation result in similar cuing effects at short SOAs, and 
IOR effects at long SOAs, when target location discrimi-
nation is required. However, when onset and offset cues 
were presented simultaneously, only onset cues facilitated 
discrimination, suggesting that in cases of simultaneous 
presentation, onsets dominate capture. Moreover, Boot, 
Kramer, and Peterson (2005) provided evidence that in 
an oculomotor capture paradigm, onsets were especially 
potent at capturing the eyes during goal-directed saccades, 
but there was no such effect on oculomotor capture by 
offsets. As a result, they concluded that abruptly onsetting 
objects receive attentional priority over offsets.
Top-down factors also influence attentional capture. 
When observers perform an irrelevant feature search task 
while concurrently performing a demanding secondary 
memory task, onset capture is diminished (Boot, Brock-
mole, & Simons, 2005). Furthermore, Folk and colleagues 
(Folk & Remington, 1999; Folk et al., 1992) have provided 
evidence that onsets capture attention only when observ-
Perceptual load modulates attentional capture  
by abrupt onsets
JOSHUA D. COSMAN AND SHAUN P. VECERA
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa
The abrupt appearance of a new object captures attention, even when the object is task irrelevant. These find-
ings suggest that abrupt onsets capture attention in a stimulus-driven manner and are not susceptible to top-down 
influences on attentional control. However, previous studies examining the ability of abrupt onsets to capture 
attention have used search displays that lacked significant complexity. Because attention is a limited capacity 
mechanism, it is possible that increasing the complexity, or perceptual load, of the search arrays may modulate 
capture by abrupt onsets. We used a flanker task to examine the effect of perceptual load on attentional capture 
by abruptly appearing objects. Subjects searched for a target letter through low-load (set size  1) and high-load 
(set size  6) displays. On each trial, irrelevant flankers also appeared, one as an onset and the other as an offset. 
Onset flankers affected search in low-load but not high-load displays. This modulation of attentional capture 
was not caused by generalized slowing when subjects searched through high-load displays; search for a single 
perceptually degraded target slowed response times but did not affect attentional capture. These findings dem-
onstrate that attentional capture by an abrupt onset is attenuated when people search through high-load scenes.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review
2009, 16 (2), 404-410
doi:10.3758/PBR.16.2.404
J. D. Cosman, joshua-cosman@uiowa.edu


LOAD MODULATES CAPTURE    405
manner, onset flankers should produce flanker interference 
effects, regardless of the display’s perceptual load. Alter-
natively, if capture by abrupt onsets is reduced in complex, 
high-load displays, onset distractors should produce flanker 
interference only in low-load displays.
EXPERIMENT 1
Method
Subjects. Twenty University of Iowa undergraduates participated 
for course credit. All had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Stimuli and Procedure. A Macintosh mini-computer displayed 
stimuli on a 17-in. CRT, and recorded responses and response laten-
cies. The experiment was controlled using MATLAB and the Psy-
chophysics Toolbox (Brainard, 1997).
Observers sat 75 cm from the monitor in a dimly lit room. We 
used a task that combined Lavie’s (1995) perceptual load paradigm 
and a typical abrupt onset paradigm (Yantis & Jonides, 1990). The 
time course of sample trials appears in Figure 1. A fixation point 
measuring 0.35º  0.35º appeared for 1,000 msec, followed by a 
placeholder array, which appeared for 100 msec. In both low- and 
high-load conditions, the placeholder display contained a central 
array of six figure-eight placeholders subtending 7.50º  1.60º of 
visual angle, with each placeholder measuring 1.50º  0.75º, with 
a distance of 0.45º between each placeholder. The placeholder for 
the offset flanker (1.90º  0.90º) appeared either above or below the 
six centrally located placeholders. The center of the flanking place-
holder was positioned 3.0º from the fixation point and 4.5º from the 
center of the most eccentric placeholders in the central array.
Next, line segments disappeared from the placeholders, including 
the offset flanker placeholder, to reveal an array of letters constitut-
ing the search array. Simultaneously with the offset of the line seg-
ments, a letter appeared in a position opposite the offset flanker; this 
onset flanker had the same measurements as the offset flanker. The 
resulting high-load display contained two flankers (one offset and 
one onset) and six centrally located, task-relevant letters containing 
a target and five distractors. The low-load display, on the other hand, 
contained two flankers and a single letter (always the target) in one 
of the six possible locations. This search array remained visible for 
ers are set for onset targets. If observers are either cued 
to or search for a target defined by color rather than by 
onset status, onsets no longer appear to capture attention 
(Folk & Remington, 1999; Folk et al., 1992). However, 
a recent study by Schreij, Owens, and Theeuwes (2008), 
using a paradigm nearly identical to that used by Folk 
et al. (1992), showed that onsets presented simultaneously 
with the offset of features creating a search array captured 
attention, despite observers’ attentional set for color. This 
provides further evidence that onsets dominate attentional 
capture when presented simultaneously with other salient 
stimuli, even if observers are not set to search for them.
In sum, although some evidence suggests that top-down 
factors such as attentional set or memory load can affect 
onset capture, other evidence suggests that onsets are 
unique in their ability to capture attention in a stimulus-
 driven manner. In the present article, we ask whether 
scene complexity affects onset capture; specifically, do 
abruptly appearing objects capture attention in complex 
scenes containing many objects? Affirmative and nega-
tive answers to this question seem equally plausible. The 
initial findings on onset capture demonstrated that onset 
targets produced faster responses than did offset targets 
across a range of set sizes. If large set sizes correspond to 
more complex scenes, the initial onset-capture results sug-
gest that scene complexity does not influence attentional 
capture. However, in classic onset-capture studies, the tar-
get can appear as an onset, allowing top-down factors to 
modulate capture by onsets.
In contrast, other evidence suggests that task-irrelevant 
targets can be ignored in complex scenes that have a “high 
perceptual load” (Lavie, 1995). When searching for a tar-
get letter among several distractors (high perceptual load 
displays), observers can disregard an irrelevant flanking 
letter, but when the target letter is presented by itself (low 
perceptual load displays), observers cannot disregard the 
flanker, and the flanker affects reaction times (RTs) to the 
target (Lavie, 1995; Lavie & Cox, 1997). Lavie and col-
leagues have hypothesized that high-load displays are more 
resource demanding, leaving few attentional resources to 
“spill over” to the flanker; such spillover can, however, 
occur in low-load displays. Unfortunately, studies of per-
ceptual load do not shed light on whether onset capture is 
affected by scene complexity. Targets in perceptual load 
tasks appear as onsets, which could allow observers to 
be set for onsets and could prioritize abruptly appearing 
flankers (as in Eltiti, Wallace, & Fox, 2005).
To examine the effect of scene complexity—that is, per-
ceptual load—on attentional capture by abrupt onsets, we 
used a hybrid flanker and feature search task. Observers 
were presented with a central search array that contained 
either one (low-load) or six (high-load) letters, all defined 
as offsets, as shown in Figure 1. Defining the target and 
distractors as offsets would prevent observers from being 
set for display-wide onsets (Gibson & Kelsey, 1998) and 
should bias attentional control settings toward offsets, not 
onsets. The search array was flanked above and below by ir-
relevant distractors, one offset flanker and one onset flanker. 
If abrupt onsets capture attention in a purely stimulus- driven 
1,000 msec
100 msec
100 msec
Until response
Figure 1. Sequence of events and timing parameters for Experi-
ment 1. Following presentation of a fixation point for 1,000 msec, 
a six-item placeholder array was presented for 100 msec, and line 
segments then disappeared to reveal the search array, which was 
presented for 100 msec. Search arrays could be high load (six 
items) or low load (one item). In Experiment 2, timing parameters 
were the same as in Experiment 1, but in the low-load condition 
the placeholder array consisted of a single placeholder at the loca-
tion of the to-be-presented target.


406    COSMAN AND VECERA
this trimming eliminated less than 1% of the data. Observ-
ers’ mean RT and error rate data for each condition are 
shown in Figure 2. We analyzed both accuracy and RT data 
with a three-factor repeated measures ANOVA, with display 
load (high vs. low) flanker type (whether the non neutral 
flanker appeared as an onset or as an offset), and flanker 
congruency (congruent vs. incongruent) as factors.
We found a main effect of perceptual load [F(1,19)  
140.2, p  .0001], with faster RTs in the low-load condition 
(474 msec) than in the high-load condition (598 msec). In 
addition, there was a main effect of onset status [F(1,19)  
6.8, p  .02] and flanker congruency [F(1,19)  10.2, 
p  .005]. The two-way interactions between load and 
flanker type [F(1,19)  0.05, n.s.], load and flanker con-
gruency [F(1,19)  1.2, n.s.], and flanker type and flanker 
congruency [F(1,19)  1.3, n.s.] were not significant, nor 
was the three-way interaction between load, flanker type, 
and flanker congruency [F(1,19)  0.89, n.s.]. Although 
planned comparisons revealed a significant flanker effect 
in the low-load onset condition (36 msec) [t(19)  2.6, 
p  .01], a smaller (19-msec) but significant [t(19)  2.2, 
p  .05] flanker effect was also observed in the low-load 
offset condition, which is somewhat anomalous, given our 
prediction that onset flankers would dominate capture 
when presented simultaneously with offset flankers.
Error rates did not differ significantly between onset 
and offset flanker conditions [F(1,19)  1.9, n.s.] or 
between congruent and incongruent flanker conditions 
[F(1,19)  2.5, n.s.]. However, there was a significant 
main effect of load on error rates, with subjects showing 
higher error rates in the high-load condition [F(1,19)  
12.7, p  .001].
Although these results indicate that onset capture is 
affected by perceptual load, the finding of capture by 
both onset and offset flankers does not fit well with pre-
vious studies. On the one hand, the contingent involun-
tary orienting hypothesis of Folk et al. (1992) would pre-
100 msec, so that the time from the placeholder array to the target 
offset was 200 msec, too brief a duration to permit eye movements.
The observers’ task was to report the identity of a target letter, 
which was an E or an H either embedded within an array of the five 
distractor letters U, L, P, C, or J (high load) or presented by itself 
(low load). Each letter was equally likely to appear in any of the six 
different positions in the search array. One of the flanker letters was 
always the letter S, which was neutral with respect to target (and 
distractor) identities. The other flanker was an E or an H congruent 
or incongruent with the target letter. Observers reported the target’s 
identity by pressing either the “z” or the “/” key, with response keys 
for the E and H targets being counterbalanced between observers. 
Following 48 practice trials, observers responded to 576 experimen-
tal trials. Trials were blocked by load, with each block containing 48 
trials of either high- or low-load displays. There were 6 blocks each 
of high- and low-load displays, resulting in 12 blocks total. High- 
and low-load blocks were alternated and counterbalanced, such that 
half of the subjects alternated high, low, high, low, and so on, and the 
other half of the subjects alternated low, high, low, high, and so on. 
We told observers to maintain fixation but informed them that the 
flanker letters, being irrelevant to the task, should be ignored.
With this design, it was possible to examine the effects of task-
irrelevant onset and offset flankers on search performance under 
conditions of both high and low perceptual load. Specifically, the 
central search array on each trial was flanked by letters that appeared 
simultaneously both above and below the array. Because the place-
holder array preceding the search array contained a placeholder for 
only one of the two possible flanker locations (either above or below 
the array), one of the flanker letters always appeared as an onset. On 
each trial, there was a 50% chance that the offset flanker would be 
neutral with respect to the target, leaving a 25% chance that the onset 
flanker would be either congruent or incongruent with respect to the 
target. Onset flankers were equally likely to appear above or below 
the array. On the basis of the findings of Schreij et al. (2008), onsets 
would be predicted to dominate capture on each trial, even though 
observers were set to search for an offset target. Thus, if perceptual 
load modulates attentional capture by abrupt onsets, we would ex-
pect to see capture only in the low-load onset condition.
Results and Discussion
Across all experiments, RTs of less than 150 msec, or 
greater than 2,000 msec, were excluded from the analyses; 
800
750
700
650
600
550
500
450
400
RT (msec)
Onset
14.6
14.5
14.6
14.3
6.3
4.8
7.4
7.8
Offset
Onset
Onset Status
Offset
Low Load
High Load
Congruent
Incongruent
Figure 2. Mean reaction times for high- and low-load conditions when flankers 
were onsets or offsets in Experiment 1. Error rates for each condition are indicated in 
white at the base of the graph. Error bars represent 95% within-subjects confidence 
intervals.


LOAD MODULATES CAPTURE    407
Results and Discussion
Mean RT and error rate data for each condition are 
shown in Figure 3. As in Experiment 1, both accuracy 
and RT data were analyzed with a three-factor repeated 
measures ANOVA, with display load (high vs. low) onset 
status (onset vs. offset), and flanker congruency (congru-
ent vs. incongruent) as factors.
We observed a main effect of load [F(1,19)  65.7, 
p  .0001], where RTs in the low-load condition were 
faster overall (497 msec) than those in the high-load con-
dition (667 msec). In addition, there was a main effect 
of congruency [F(1,19)  7.5, p  .02], driven by the 
significant flanker effect in the low-load onset condi-
tion. There was no main effect of onset status [F(1,19)  
2.0, n.s.], and the two-way interactions between load 
and flanker type [F(1,19)  .05, n.s.], load and flanker 
congruency [F(1,19)  1.2, n.s.], and flanker type and 
flanker congruency [F(1,19)  1.3, n.s.] were not sig-
nificant. However, the three-way interaction of load, 
onset status, and congruency was significant [F(1,19)  
5.8, p  .03], indicating that onset capture depended on 
the level of perceptual load. Most important, Figure 3 
reveals that attentional capture by the irrelevant distrac-
tors was observed only in the low-load onset condition, 
as confirmed with planned comparisons on the compat-
ible versus incompatible conditions for each of the four 
onset-by-load conditions. There was a significant flanker 
effect in the low-load onset condition only (30 msec) 
[t(19)  3.8, p  .001]; none of the other flanker effects 
were significant (ts  1.3, ps  .30). Thus, it appears that 
the offset transient produced by the placeholder array in 
Experiment 1 was responsible for the significant flanker 
effect in the low-load offset condition.
Error rates did not differ significantly between onset 
and offset flanker conditions [F(1,19)  1.3, n.s.] or 
between congruent and incongruent flanker conditions 
dict capture only when the flanker was an offset, because 
observers were set to search for an offset target. On the 
other hand, the results of Schreij et al. (2008) would pre-
dict capture only when the flanker was an onset, because 
their findings showed that onsets presented simultane-
ously with a search array dominate capture, regardless 
of attentional set.
 One reason we might have observed attentional cap-
ture in the low-load offset condition is because observ-
ers were presented with a placeholder array containing 
six offsetting placeholders, thereby generating a large 
offset transient. As a result, it is possible that this off-
set transient set display-wide attentional control settings 
(see Gibson & Kelsey, 1998) and caused offset flank-
ers to capture attention, driving the flanker effect seen 
in the low-load offset condition. We tested this hypoth-
esis in Experiment 2 with a paradigm identical to that 
used in Experiment 1, with the exception that a single 
placeholder preceded the target in the low-load condi-
tion (Figure 1). If the offset transient produced by the 
large placeholder array in Experiment 1 was responsible 
for the offset capture we observed in the low-load con-
dition of Experiment 1, we would expect the results of 
Experiment 2 to show capture only in the low-load onset 
condition.
EXPERIMENT 2
Method
Subjects. Twenty University of Iowa undergraduates participated 
in a single session for course credit. All observers had normal or 
corrected-to-normal vision.
Stimuli and Procedure. The design of Experiment 2 was identi-
cal to that of Experiment 1, except that in the low-load condition the 
search array was preceded by a single placeholder at the location of 
the target. This design eliminated the large offset transient present 
in Experiment 1.
800
750
700
650
600
550
500
450
400
RT (msec)
Onset
9.8
11.1
11.5
10.9
5.8
6.2
6.1
6.1
Offset
Onset
Onset Status
Offset
Low Load
High Load
Congruent
Incongruent
Figure 3. Mean reaction times for high- and low-load conditions when flankers 
were onsets or offsets in Experiment 2. Error rates for each condition are indicated in 
white at the base of the graph. Error bars represent 95% within-subjects confidence 
intervals.


408    COSMAN AND VECERA
eralized slowing effect, we would expect to see onset 
capture in the high-contrast condition only. However, if 
the results of Experiment 2 were due to perceptual load, 
we would expect to see onset capture in both high- and 
low-contrast conditions because both of these conditions 
presented only a single target and thus involved a low 
perceptual load.
EXPERIMENT 3
Method
Subjects. Twenty University of Iowa undergraduates participated 
in a single session for course credit. All observers had normal or 
corrected-to-normal vision.
Stimuli and Procedure. For both conditions, displays were iden-
tical to the low-load display in Experiment 2, with the following 
exception: To make the task more difficult without increasing per-
ceptual load, the contrast of the target in the low-contrast condition 
was decreased by 50%, as compared with the target letter in the 
high-contrast condition
Results and Discussion
Mean RT and error rate data for each condition are 
shown in Figure 4. Both accuracy and RT data were ana-
lyzed with a three-factor repeated measures ANOVA, with 
target contrast (high vs. low) onset status (onset vs. off-
set), and flanker congruency (congruent vs. incongruent) 
as factors.
We observed a main effect of target contrast [F(1,19)  
16.92, p  .001], with longer RTs in the low-contrast 
condition (623 msec) than in the high-contrast condi-
tion (518 msec). No other main effects or interactions 
approached significance (Fs  2.2, ps  .11). Most im-
portant, planned  comparisons revealed that attentional 
capture was observed in both the low- and high-contrast 
onset conditions: There were significant flanker effects in 
the low-contrast onset condition (38 msec) [t(19)  2.9, 
[F(1,19)  1.1, n.s.]. However, there was a significant 
main effect of load on error rates, with subjects showing 
higher error rates in the high-load condition [F(1,19)  
10.2, p  .01].
These results indicate that onset capture is affected 
by perceptual load. When observers searched through 
complex, high-load displays, they were not captured by 
abruptly appearing irrelevant distractors. However, onset 
capture was robust when observers viewed displays in 
which the target appeared alone and required relatively 
little attentional processing (or resources, as proposed by 
Lavie, 1995). Thus, available attentional resources may 
modulate attentional capture. When attentional resources 
are abundant in the low-load condition, observers are sus-
ceptible to capture by irrelevant information because of 
spillover to the flankers; when attentional processes are 
exhausted by a demanding search in the high-load condi-
tion, there is no spillover, and no flanker effects emerge.
Although the results of Experiment 2 indicate that per-
ceptual load modulates onset capture, it is possible that 
capture by abrupt onsets is masked by long RTs in the 
high-load condition. Specifically, generalized slowing in 
the high-load condition may have obscured any evidence 
of onset capture. To rule out this possibility, we manipu-
lated task difficulty independently of perceptual load in 
Experiment 3. Observers viewed arrays that contained 
a single target letter and two irrelevant letters, as in the 
low-load condition of Experiment 2. The target letter ap-
peared as either a black letter on a white background 
(the high-contrast condition, which was a replication of 
the low-load condition in Experiment 2) or as a light 
gray letter on a white background (the low- contrast con-
dition). This contrast manipulation allowed us to vary 
task difficulty without increasing the perceptual load of 
the display (also see Lavie & Cox, 1997). If the results 
of Experiment 2 merely reflect a task difficulty or gen-
800
750
700
650
600
550
500
450
400
RT (msec)
Onset
12.1
11.9
11.9
13.5
6.6
6.9
6.5
7.2
Offset
Onset
Onset Status
Offset
High Contrast
Low Contrast
Congruent
Incongruent
Figure 4. Mean reaction times for high-contrast (easy search) and low-contrast (dif-
ficult search) target conditions in Experiment 3. Error rates for each condition are 
indicated in white at the base of the graph. Error bars represent 95% within-subjects 
confidence intervals.


LOAD MODULATES CAPTURE    409
valid exogenous spatial precues did not result in the RT 
benefit typically seen in such tasks, indicating that per-
ceptual load influenced the ability of the abruptly appear-
ing precues to capture attention.
Our finding of offset capture in the low-load condition 
of Experiment 1 deserves mention. The offset capture 
observed in Experiment 1 suggests that contingent atten-
tional capture might be modulated by perceptual load. As-
suming that offset capture was due to contingent capture 
established by the large offset transient in this experiment, 
we observed contingent capture in the low-load condition 
only. We are tentative in drawing this conclusion, because 
the present experiments did not systematically examine 
contingent capture. We plan to study this issue further.
Although our results suggest that scene complexity may 
modulate capture by abruptly appearing objects, there 
is evidence for capture by onsets in complex, rendered 
scenes (Brockmole & Henderson, 2008). In their task, 
Brockmole and Henderson presented participants with 
a realistically rendered real-world scene in which one of 
the objects onsets abruptly on half of the trials. Observ-
ers were more likely to fixate objects that onset abruptly, 
suggesting that these objects captured attention despite 
the high information content of the scene. There seem to 
be several explanations for the apparent discrepancy be-
tween our results and Brockmole and Henderson’s find-
ings. For example, real-world scenes have semantic con-
sistency that might reduce perceptual load, even though 
the scene contains several objects. Also, all of the items 
in our search array were relevant to the task observers 
performed. Capture may not depend on the complexity 
of the scene per se, but rather on the amount of relevant 
perceptual information being processed at the time of the 
onset. In short, there may be many factors, including per-
ceptual load, that affect capture by abrupt onsets.
AUTHOR NOTE
This research was supported in part by a grant from the National Sci-
ence Foundation (BCS 03-39171), awarded to S.P.V. We thank Jay Pratt, 
Angus Gellatly, and Daryl Wilson for helpful comments on an earlier 
version of this article. We also thank Nicholas Gaspelin and Vanessa 
Jimenez for assistance collecting data. Correspondence should be ad-
dressed to J. D. Cosman, Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, 
E11 Seashore Hall, Iowa City, IA 52242-1407 (e-mail: joshua-cosman@
uiowa.edu).
REFERENCES
Abrams, R. A., & Christ, S. E. (2003). Motion onset captures attention. 
Psychological Science, 14, 427-432.
Boot, W. R., Brockmole, J. R., & Simons, D. J. (2005). Attention cap-
ture is modulated in dual-task situations. Psychonomic Bulletin & 
Review, 12, 662-668.
Boot, W. R., Kramer, A. F., & Peterson, M. S. (2005). Oculomotor 
consequences of abrupt object onsets and offsets: Onsets dominate 
oculomotor capture. Perception & Psychophysics, 67, 910-928.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial Vision, 
10, 433-436.
Brockmole, J. R., & Henderson, J. M. (2008). Prioritizing new objects 
for eye fixation in real-world scenes: Effects of object–scene consis-
tency. Visual Cognition, 16, 375-390.
Christ, S. E., & Abrams, R. A. (2006). Abrupt onsets cannot be ignored. 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13, 875-880.
Eltiti, S., Wallace, D., & Fox, E. (2005). Selective target processing: 
p  .01] and the high-contrast onset condition (27 msec) 
[t(19)  2.9, p  .01].
Error rates did not differ significantly between onset 
and offset flanker conditions [F(1,19)  0.9, n.s.] or 
between congruent and incongruent flanker conditions 
[F(1,19)  0.7, n.s.]. However, there was a significant 
main effect of target contrast on error rates, with subjects 
showing higher error rates in the low-contrast condition 
[F(1,19)  7.6, p  .02].
These results indicate that the effect observed in Ex-
periment 2 was not due to the difficulty of our search task, 
since we observed onset capture even in a relatively dif-
ficult low-contrast condition. This further suggests that 
increasing perceptual load per se can diminish onset cap-
ture by task-irrelevant objects.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Across three experiments, we demonstrated that the 
ability of an abruptly appearing object to capture attention 
depends on perceptual load. Our findings contrast with 
recent reports showing that abruptly appearing objects 
capture attention in a mandatory, stimulus-driven man-
ner (Christ & Abrams, 2006; Neo & Chua, 2006; Schreij 
et al., 2008). Our novel findings imply that onset capture 
may not occur in all displays but, instead, may depend on 
scene complexity. Furthermore, the lack of capture by off-
set flankers in Experiments 2 and 3, despite an attentional 
set for offsets, is inconsistent with the claim that attention 
capture is contingent solely on top-down control settings 
(Folk et al., 1992).
There are several potential interpretations of our find-
ings. For example, load theory (Lavie, 1995; Lavie & Tsal, 
1994) would suggest that, as perceptual resources are ex-
hausted, attention becomes less able to be captured by 
abrupt, irrelevant flankers. However, the lack of capture by 
offset flankers in Experiments 2 and 3 is inconsistent with 
a strong version of load theory, which predicts that load 
only, not onset/offset status, will affect RTs. There are also 
nonresource accounts that could explain our results. For 
example, attention may be more narrowly focused when 
targets in high-load displays are searched for, minimizing 
onset capture, consistent with previous claims (Yantis & 
Johnston, 1990; but see Christ & Abrams, 2006). Irrespec-
tive of the exact mechanism that allows perceptual load to 
modulate onset capture, our present results are theoreti-
cally important in providing the first demonstration that 
perceptual load indeed modulates attentional capture by 
abrupt onsets.
The interpretation that onset capture is not purely stimu-
lus driven is in line with Boot et al.’s (2005) recent finding 
that abruptly appearing objects are less likely to capture 
attention under conditions of high cognitive load, when 
central processing stages are occupied by a concurrent 
working memory task. Further support for a modulation 
of onset capture comes from Santangelo, Finoia, Raffone, 
Belardinelli, and Spence (2008), who demonstrated that 
increasing perceptual load in a spatial cuing task reduces 
a cue’s ability to attract attention. In high-load situations, 


410    COSMAN AND VECERA
Neo, G., & Chua, F. (2006). Capturing focused attention. Perception & 
Psychophysics, 68, 1286-1296.
Pratt, J., & McAuliffe, J. (2001). The effects of onsets and offsets on 
visual attention. Psychological Research, 65, 185-191.
Santangelo, V., Finoia, P., Raffone, A., Belardinelli, M. O., & 
Spence, C. (2008). Perceptual load affects exogenous spatial orient-
ing while working memory load does not. Experimental Brain Re-
search, 134, 371-382.
Schreij, D., Owens, C., & Theeuwes, J. (2008). Abrupt onsets capture 
attention independent of top-down control settings. Perception & Psy-
chophysics, 70, 208-218.
Theeuwes, J. (1991). Exogenous and endogenous control of attention: 
The effect of visual onsets and offsets. Perception & Psychophysics, 
49, 83-90.
Yantis, S., & Johnston, J. C. (1990). On the locus of visual selection: 
Evidence from focused attention tasks. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Human Perception & Performance, 16, 135-149.
Yantis, S., & Jonides, J. (1984). Abrupt visual onsets and selective 
attention: Evidence from visual search. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Human Perception & Performance, 10, 601-621.
Yantis, S., & Jonides, J. (1990). Abrupt visual onsets and selective 
attention: Voluntary versus automatic allocation. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 16, 121-134.
(Manuscript received March 9, 2008; 
revision accepted for publication November 12, 2008.)
Perceptual load or distractor salience? Perception & Psychophysics, 
67, 867-885.
Folk, C., & Remington, R. W. (1999). Can new objects override atten-
tional control settings? Perception & Psychophysics, 61, 727-739.
Folk, C., Remington, R. W., & Johnston, J. C. (1992). Involuntary 
covert orienting is contingent on attentional control settings. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 18, 
1030-1044.
Franconeri, S. L., & Simons, D. J. (2003). Moving and looming stimuli 
capture attention. Perception & Psychophysics, 65, 999-1010.
Franconeri, S. L., Simons, D. J., & Junge, J. A. (2004). Searching for 
stimulus-driven shifts of attention. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 
11, 876-881.
Gibson, B. S., & Kelsey, E. M. (1998). Stimulus-driven attentional 
capture is contingent on attentional set for displaywide visual features. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception & Perfor-
mance, 24, 699-706.
Lavie, N. (1995). Perceptual load as a necessary condition for selective 
attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception & 
Performance, 21, 451-468.
Lavie, N. & Cox, S. (1997). On the efficiency of visual selective atten-
tion: Efficient visual search results in inefficient distractor rejection. 
Psychological Science, 8, 395-396.
Lavie, N., & Tsal, Y. (1994). Perceptual load as a major determinant of 
the locus of selection in visual attention. Perception & Psychophysics, 
56, 183-197.


