 
A Field Study to Collect Expert 
Knowledge for the Development of AR 
HUD Navigation Concepts 
 
 
Abstract 
A promising advancement of conventional head-up dis-
plays in vehicles is the implementation of augmented re-
ality. By projecting the content onto the vehicle’s wind-
shield, information can be displayed in a contact ana-
logue way in the real world. Two major challenges for 
concept developers are to reduce masking caused by 
augmented reality content and to create concepts that 
are suitable for the limited field of view. To approach 
these challenges, we designed two contact analogue 
navigation concepts and evaluated them in a field study 
with a prototype car that contained a complete AR HUD 
testing environment. The subjects were experts in inter-
action design, AR, HUD and sales. First results of the ex-
perts’ suggestions for improvements are given in this ex-
tended abstract. 
Author Keywords 
Augmented reality; head-up display; field study; con-
tact analogue; navigation; masking  
CCS Concepts 
• Human-centered computing~Field studies   • Human-
centered computing~Mixed / augmented reality 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that cop-
ies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, 
contact the Owner/Author. 
AutomotiveUI '19 Adjunct, September 21–25, 2019, Utrecht, Netherlands 
© 2019 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6920-6/19/09. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3349263.3351339 
Matthias Schneider 
Media Informatics Group, 
University of Regensburg, GER 
Daimler AG, Stuttgart, GER 
Matthias.sc.schneider@daimler.com 
Anna Bruder 
Daimler AG, Stuttgart, GER 
Anna.bruder@daimler.com 
Marc Necker 
Daimler AG, Stuttgart, GER 
Marc.necker@daimler.com 
Tim Schluesener 
Daimler AG, Stuttgart, GER 
Tim.schluesener@daimler.com 
Niels Henze 
Media Informatics Group, 
University of Regensburg, GER 
Niels.henze@ur.de 
Christian Wolff 
Media Informatics Group, 
University of Regensburg, GER 
Christian.wolff@ur.de 
AutomotiveUI '19 Adjunct, September 21-25, 2019, Utrecht, Netherlands
358


 
Introduction 
Today’s cars are equipped with a large number of driving 
assistance systems (DAS) to support the driver in chal-
lenging traffic situations [2]. One example for current 
DAS technologies are conventional head-up  displays 
(HUDs). This technology makes it possible to display 
driving-related information in the driver’s primary field 
of view (FOV) through a virtual image that is mirrored in 
the windshield. The next step in the development pro-
cess of HUDs is the integration of augmented reality (AR) 
[1]. This allows the combination of virtual and real infor-
mation in the driver’s primary FOV and is called aug-
mented reality head-up display (AR HUD). This was re-
alized in a car for the first time by Bubb in 1975 [4]. The 
AR HUD is supposed to support drivers through a more 
intuitive way of displaying driving assistance information 
[3]. There are still several challenges to master before 
an AR HUD can be realized in a production vehicle. One 
of those is the correct superimposition of virtual infor-
mation onto the real environment. Another challenge is 
that, due to technical limitations, AR content can only be 
displayed in a small area of the windshield. Therefore, it 
is necessary to design for more complex traffic situa-
tions, such as curves, because the virtual information 
might be cut off. Additionally, superimposing virtual in-
formation onto the real traffic environment can lead to 
driver distraction, annoyance, and masking of other road 
users [10]. Thus, a further challenge in concept devel-
opment for AR HUD is to reduce masking effects while 
ensuring that the same level of information is provided.  
In this field study, two contact analogue navigation con-
cepts for AR HUD are compared in terms of their degree 
of masking the real environment and how appropriate 
they are for the use case navigation. The goal is to ex-
amine whether masking effects can be reduced while 
maintaining a consistent interpretability of the naviga-
tion cues by the integration of Gestalt Principles. Fur-
thermore, we want to collect expert knowledge to derive 
guidelines for AR HUD navigation concept design. This 
experiment is one of the first to utilise a prototype car 
with a complete AR HUD environment that includes real 
sensor and road map data. 
Navigation Concept Design 
Based on guidelines from research, especially from 
Pfannmüller [10] and Israel [6], and focus groups with 
experts in the field of AR HUD concept design, two navi-
gation concepts for AR HUD have been created. For both 
concepts a light blue colour was chosen: RGB (102, 153, 
230) with a transparency of 0. 
The Solid Fishbone Concept 
The solid fishbone concept consists of two basic ele-
ments, entry marker and middle marker. Both compo-
nents are in the shape of a fishbone as recommended by 
e.g. Israel [6], to result in a smoother cut when leaving 
the FOV as well as less masking of the real world. The 
entry marker consists of a curved fishbone that virtually 
lies on the street in a contact analogue way while show-
ing the upcoming turn (see Figure 1). When the driver 
approaches a manoeuvre point, the entry marker fades 
in 90 meters in advance with an initial slanted position 
(tilt = 15°) to achieve a better visibility. While getting 
closer to the manoeuvre, the tilt is reduced to 0° in a 
steady manner and the entry marker fades out. Next, 
the middle marker fades in resembling a wall of upright 
fishbones that is placed in the centre of the road the up-
coming manoeuvre points into (see Figure 2). The mid-
dle marker is longer than the FOV and is also shown dur-
ing turning. The fade in and out time is 0.5 seconds for 
both of the elements. 
 
Figure 1: The entry marker of the 
solid fishbone concept. 
 
 
Figure 2: The middle marker of the 
solid fishbone concept. 
 
 
Figure 3: The middle marker of the 
dotted fishbone concept. 
AutomotiveUI '19 Adjunct, September 21-25, 2019, Utrecht, Netherlands
359


 
The Dotted Fishbone Concept 
The components and their behaviour are the same for 
both of the navigation concepts with the only difference 
that the core element of the dotted fishbone concept is 
a fishbone consisting of dots (see Figure 3). The idea 
behind that is that the driver should still recognize the 
fishbone shape with the help of Gestalt Principles, espe-
cially Principle of Proximity and Principle of Good Contin-
uation. At the same time, the dotted design should lead 
to a lower degree of masking. However, it might happen 
that the mental workload of the driver is higher while 
using the dotted fishbones because its elements might 
be harder to recognize and interpret than the solid ones 
[8]. 
Experiment 
In this section information about study participants, the 
test track, the test environment, and the procedure is 
given. 
Participants 
To get valuable expert knowledge about masking effects 
and the development of future navigation concepts, only 
experts in fields relevant for the development of an AR 
HUD were chosen as subjects. In total, 26 participants 
took part in the study. Two datasets had to be excluded 
from the analysis due to technical problems. Of the re-
maining 24 participants, five were female and 19 male, 
ages ranging from 22 to 51 years. Every driver had used 
a static HUD before but only one participant had one in 
his private car. The participants’ attitude toward HUD in 
general was positive. All subjects gave written consent 
to participate in the study. 
Test Track 
An important factor for the test track was a consistent 
traffic density during the drives were conducted (be-
tween 9:00 am and 4:00 pm). The chosen test track (see 
Figure 4) mainly consisted of streets with a speed limit 
of 30 kph. With the help of predefined waypoints, the 
test vehicle showed the manoeuvres of the test track 
even though a free navigation or redirection would have 
been possible with this system as well. 
Test Environment 
As the test vehicle, a prototype with integrated AR HUD 
was used. Figure 5 shows an image of the interface of 
the prototype car which shows the middle marker of the 
dotted fishbones. Furthermore, a predevelopment envi-
ronment software was created for the car. It includes the 
so-called Robot Operating System (ROS) that is used to 
synchronize the vehicle’s sensor and bus data (GPS, ac-
celerometer, gyroscope, and FlexRay). Also, a map in-
terface by HERE maps was included to access current 
map data online. With the help of the toolkit QT, a graph-
ical user interface for AR HUD was created and addition-
ally, the Open Graphics Library (Open GL) was used as 
rendering pipeline. For the AR content creation, the 3D 
tool Autodesk Maya was used.  
Procedure 
After getting an introduction to the test vehicle, the par-
ticipants followed a short practice route to familiarise 
themselves with the test vehicle. Next, the subjects 
stopped at a parking area next to the starting point of 
the track. The HUD was calibrated along the y-axis with 
the help of a fixed point. While the examiner started the 
test environment, the drivers filled out a questionnaire 
covering demographical data, driving experience, expe-
rience with HUD, and the weather conditions. Next, the 
 
Figure 4: The track had a length of 2.5 
km and contained nine right as well as 
nine left turns and one straight manoeu-
vre crossing a street. Also, a little 
roundabout was on the test track. 
 
 
Figure 5: Interface of the test vehicle. 
Votes 
Positive feedback 
7 
notifications are pleasant in 
terms of their colour scheme 
5 
contact analogue positioning 
5 
fade-in timing of the fishbones 
3 
eyes-off-the-road time was de-
creasing 
Table 1: Positive feedback related to 
both concept variants. 
AutomotiveUI '19 Adjunct, September 21-25, 2019, Utrecht, Netherlands
360


 
subjects were asked to think aloud during the drives. 
Every participant completed the test track twice with 
identical test procedures for both AR HUD concepts. The 
order in which the concept variants were tested was 
counterbalanced across participants to mitigate the in-
fluence of training effects on the performance measures 
used. The examiner was seated next to the driver while 
a second person was sitting in the back to log special 
incidents like navigational errors. Additionally, a GoPro 
dashcam was integrated in the test vehicle to record au-
dio and video data. If subjects were insecure about in-
terpreting the navigational cues, they were asked to tell 
the examiner in which direction the navigational cue 
pointed. This was done to avoid possible rerouting incon-
sistencies. After finishing the route, participants filled out 
the User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) [5] and the 
Driving Activity Load Index (DALI), a tool designed to 
evaluate the driver’s mental workload [9]. In addition, a 
self-designed questionnaire based on Pfannmüller [10] 
to assess design, degree of masking, distraction, and po-
sitioning accuracy was used. An open questions part was 
included to find out what the drivers liked or disliked 
about the navigation concepts and what they would im-
prove. After the second drive, the subjects were asked 
to compare the concepts, state their favourite and to ex-
plain their decision. Also, they stated ideas on how to 
combine static and contact analogue elements. 
 
First Results 
First results of the open questions asked are given in this 
section. The evaluation was conducted according to the 
qualitative content analysis by Mayring et al. [7]. There 
was positive and negative feedback that was valid for 
both concepts which is listed in Table 1 and 2 respec-
tively. In addition, the subjects made suggestions for im-
provements concerning both concepts (see Table 3). 
When asked which concept they preferred and for what 
main reasons, the results showed a slight preference for 
the solid fishbones. In total, the solid fishbones got 12 
votes, the dotted fishbones got nine, and three experts 
had no favourite. In case of the solid fishbone concept, 
six subjects mentioned that it is easier to interpret, es-
pecially when the AR content is cut off strongly due to 
the limited FOV and only parts of the fishbones remain 
visible. Three participants thought the solid fishbones 
had a better design. For the dotted fishbone concept, six 
participants mentioned less masking as one of their main 
reason for preferring it. Two experts said that their cog-
nitive load was lower and also, the design was preferred 
two times. 
Discussion and Conclusion 
In this study, an open questions part was included to 
collect expert knowledge in terms of navigation concepts 
for AR HUD which can be used for future concept devel-
opment. First results have been given already and fur-
ther findings can be looked up in Schneider et al. [11] 
together with the results of the evaluated masking ef-
fects. Even though the concepts were only evaluated in 
one specific car, this study can be seen as one of the first 
approaches to investigate navigation concepts for an AR 
HUD in the real traffic. We used experts in the field of AR 
HUD development as subjects to get detailed information 
on what a suitable navigation concept for AR HUD should 
look like and on how critical the caused masking effects 
are. Future studies should also focus on participants 
without expert knowledge to transfer the results to the 
general population. Also, masking effects could be ex-
amined further by integrating objective measurements 
like physical targets placed on a private test track. 
Votes 
Negative feedback 
18 
imprecise positioning of the nav-
igation cues 
7 
transition between entry and 
middle marker is too abrupt 
6 
entry marker should be dis-
played longer 
3 
Entry marker too small 
2 
Entry marker appears too late 
Table 2: Negative feedback which is re-
lated to both concept variants. 
 
 
Votes 
Suggestions for improvements 
9|15 
Include possibility to adjust con-
cept concerning size, number of 
elements, and colour 
7|9 
Improve positioning in general 
6|4 
Integration of pre-indication 
2|2 
Integrate permanent notification 
to show that system is running 
3|1 
Extend display time of entry 
marker 
2|0 
Make brightness adjustable 
Table 3: Suggestions for improvements 
which are related to both concept vari-
ants. The votes on the left side have been 
given for the solid fishbones, the votes on 
the right side for the dotted ones. 
AutomotiveUI '19 Adjunct, September 21-25, 2019, Utrecht, Netherlands
361


 
 References 
1. 
Ronald T. Azuma. 1997. A Survey of Augmented 
Reality. Teleoperators and Virtual Environments 6, 
4: 355-385. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/pres.1997.6.4.355 
2. 
Klaus Bengler, Klaus Dietmayer, Berthold Faerber, 
Markus Maurer, Christoph Stiller, and Hermann 
Winner. 2014. Three Decades of Driver Assistance 
Systems: Review and Future Perspectives. IEEE In-
telligent Transportation Systems Magazine 6, 4: 6–
22. https://doi.org/10.1109/MITS.2014.2336271 
3. 
Klaus Bengler, Martin Götze, Lisa Pfannmüller, and 
Albert Zaindl. 2015. To See or not to See - Innova-
tive Display Technologies as Enablers for Ergo-
nomic Cockpit Concepts. Ergonomic Requirements, 
Future Mobility, Future Functionality. In Proceed-
ings of the electronic displays Conference. 
4. 
Heiner Bubb. 1975. Untersuchungen über die An-
zeige des Bremsweges im Fahrzeug. Doctoral Dis-
sertation. Technical University of Munich, Munich, 
GER. 
5. 
Andreas Hinderks, Martin Schrepp, and Joerg 
Thomaschewski. 2018. UEQ – User Experience 
Questionnaire. Retrieved September 12, 2018 from 
http://www.ueq-online.org/ 
6. 
Boris Israel. 2013. Potenziale eines kontaktanalo-
gen Head-up Displays für den Serieneinsatz. Doc-
toral Dissertation. Technical University of Munich, 
Munich, GER. 
7. 
Philipp Mayring and Thomas Fenzl. 2014. Qualita-
tive Inhaltsanalyse. In Handbuch Methoden der 
empirischen Sozialforschung, Nina Baur and Joerg 
Blasius (eds.). Springer VS, Wiesbaden, GER, 543-
556. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-18939-
0_38 
8. 
Wolfgang Narzt, Gustav Pomberger, Alois Ferscha, 
Dieter Kolb, Reiner Mueller, Jan Wieghardt, Horst 
Hoertner, and Christopher Lindinger. 2006. Aug-
mented reality navigation systems. Universal Ac-
cess in the Information Society 4, 3: 177-187. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10209-005-0017-5 
9. 
Annie Pauzié. 2008. A method to assess the driver 
mental workload: The driving activity load index 
(DALI). IET Intelligent Transport Systems 2, 4: 
315-322. https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-its:20080023 
10. Lisa Pfannmüller. 2017. Anzeigekonzepte für ein 
kontaktanaloges Head-up Display. Doctoral disser-
tation. Technical University of Munich, Munich, 
GER. 
11. Matthias Schneider, Anna Bruder, Marc Necker, Tim 
Schluesener, Niels Henze, and Christian Wolff. 
2019. A real-world driving experiment to collect ex-
pert knowledge for the design of AR HUD naviga-
tion that covers less. In Mensch und Computer 
2019 – Workshopband, Wolf and Steinicke (eds.). 
Bonn: Gesellschaft für Informatik e.V..  
 
 
AutomotiveUI '19 Adjunct, September 21-25, 2019, Utrecht, Netherlands
362


