Wayfinding in the blind: larger hippocampal volume
and supranormal spatial navigation
Madeleine Fortin,1 Patrice Voss,1 Catherine Lord,2 Maryse Lassonde,1,3 Jens Pruessner,2
Dave Saint-Amour,1,3,4 Constant Rainville5,6 and Franco Lepore1,3,5
1Centre de Recherche en Neuropsychologie et Cognition, Universite¤ de Montre¤ al, 2Douglas Hospital Research Center,
McGill University, 3Centre de recherche, CHU Sainte-Justine, 4De¤ partement d’Ophtalmologie, Universite¤ de Montre¤ al,
5Centre de Recherche de l’Institut Universitaire de Ge¤ riatrie de Montre¤ al and 6Center for Interdisciplinary Research in
Rehabilitation, Montre¤ al, Que¤ bec, Canada
Correspondence to: Franco Lepore, Centre de Recherche en Neuropsychologie et Cognition, De¤ partement de Psychologie,
Universite¤ de Montre¤ al, Case Postale 6128, Succursale Centre-ville, Montre¤ al, Que¤ bec, Canada, H3C 3J7
E-mail: franco.lepore@umontreal.ca
In the absence of visual input, the question arises as to how complex spatial abilities develop and how the brain
adapts to the absence of this modality.We explored navigational skills in both early and late blind individuals and
structural differences in the hippocampus, a brain region well known to be involved in spatial processing.Thirty-
eight participants were divided into three groups: early blind individuals (n= 12; loss of vision before 5 years of
age; mean age 33.8 years), late blind individuals (n= 7; loss of vision after14 years of age; mean age 39.9 years) and
19 sighted, blindfolded matched controls. Subjects undertook route learning and pointing tasks in a maze and a
spatial layout task. Anatomical data was collected by MRI. Remarkably, we not only show that blind individuals
possess superior navigational skills than controls on the route learning task, but we also show for the first time
a significant volume increase
of the hippocampus in blind individuals
[F(1,36) = 6.314; P· 0.01;
blind:
mean = 4237.00 mm3, SE = 107.53; sighted: mean = 3905.74 mm3, SE = 76.27], irrespective of whether their blind-
ness was congenital or acquired. Overall, our results shed new light not only on the construction of spatial con-
cepts and the non-necessity of vision for its proper development, but also on the hippocampal plasticity
observed in adult blind individuals who have to navigate in this space.
Keywords: blindness; hippocampus; maze tasks; plasticity; volumetric MRI
Received March 10, 2008. Revised August 12, 2008. Accepted September 4, 2008. Advance Access publication October14, 2008
Introduction
Wayfinding requires the proper encoding, processing and
retrieval of spatial information. Successful spatial navigation
also requires the activation of a network of brain regions that
are essential for the processing of space (Ghaem et al., 1997;
Maguire et al., 1998). The hippocampus, in particular, plays
an important role for navigation in large-scale environments
(Burgess et al., 2002). The contribution of this structure to
the processing of spatial information has been demonstrated
in several human (Vargha-Khadem et al., 1997; Barrash et al.,
2000) and animal studies (Morris et al. 1982; Moser et al.,
1993; Colombo et al., 1998). It has also been shown that
hippocampal volume varies as a function of experience: the
more spatial memory is important or essential for the
survival of a species, the larger is the structure (Barnea and
Nottebohm 1994; Clayton and Krebs, 1994; Lee et al., 1998).
Interestingly, a study carried out by Maguire et al. (2000)
revealed structural differences in the hippocampi of London
taxi
drivers compared
with control participants.
Taxi
drivers were selected because they undergo 2 years of
training before obtaining their taxi license, thus making
them experts in spatial navigation. Taxi drivers showed a
bilateral increase in grey matter density in the posterior
sections of each hippocampus as well as a bilateral decrease
in grey matter density in its anterior sections compared to
control participants. Moreover, a positive correlation was
found between the number of years spent driving taxis and
the grey matter density of the right posterior hippocampus.
Like taxi drivers, blind individuals require extensive
storage of information regarding their environment because
they cannot rely on vision to understand the spatial
organization of their environment and visually update
online the spatial coordinates of objects outside their reach.
They are disadvantaged compared to sighted individuals
because vision provides important and unique information
about the location and motion of the traveller as well as
doi:10.1093/brain/awn250
Brain (2008), 131, 2995^3005
 The Author (2008). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf ofthe Guarantors of Brain. Allrightsreserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
 at McGill University Libraries on October 11, 2012
http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 


cues regarding the spatial layout of the far space environment
(Strelow, 1985). Consequently, they rely more on idiothetic
cues, such as vestibular and proprioceptive information and
the monitoring of the movement made by oneself (Millar,
1994; Thinus-Blanc and Gaunet, 1997). Since it has been
shown that the hippocampus is essential for the processing
and use of idiothetic information in animals (Whishaw et al.,
2001) one might expect to see differences in hippocampal
volume in visually deprived individuals.
The aim of the current study was two-fold. First, we
submitted our subjects to a series of spatial navigation tasks
to ascertain whether or not the blind develop these skills,
and possibly, as shown in other tasks using this subject
population, whether they actually show enhanced skills with
respect to wayfinding and orientation in space. Second, we
looked at possible structural correlates of performance by
measuring hippocampal sizes (both whole and identified
sub-regions) in these individuals. It was predicted that
blind individuals would not only better perform in our
spatial tasks, but would also show differences in hippo-
campal size compared with the sighted. Moreover, we
investigated both early blind subjects and individuals who
lost their vision later in life, in whom plastic changes are
known to be more limited.
Materials and Methods
Participants
Thirty-eight participants with no history of neurological, cognitive
or sensory-motor deficits, other than blindness in the case of the
blind participants, participated in the experiment and were divided
into three groups. The first group (n = 12) consisted of early-blind
individuals (loss of vision before 5 years of age), aged between 19
and 55 years (mean age 33.8 years), nine of whom were men (three
women).
The
second
group
(n = 7)
consisted
of
late-blind
participants (loss of vision after 14 years of age) aged between 22
and 57 years (mean age 39.9 years), including four men and three
women. In all cases, blindness was attributable to peripheral damage
and led to either total blindness or at most light perception. There
was one control group composed of blindfolded sighted participants
paired for age, gender, education and laterality score, as assessed by
the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Oldfield, 1971), with each of
the two groups of blind participants. The sighted control group
(n = 19) were aged between 19 and 56 years (mean age 36.0 years),
13 of whom were men (six women). The research protocol was
approved
by
the
ethics
committees
of
the
Center
for
Interdisciplinary Research in Rehabilitation, which coordinates in
the Province of Quebec research with blind participants and is
sponsored by the Institut Nazareth & Louis Braille, by the Research
Center of the Institut Universitaire de Ge´riatrie de Montre´al, where
the testing was carried out, by the Centre Hospitalier de l’Universite´
de Montre´al (CHUM), where the MRI scans were collected, and by
the Universite´ de Montre´al, where the project originated. All
participants provided written informed consent prior to testing.
Behavioural tasks
Participants performed the tasks before undergoing the MRI scans.
It is important to keep in mind that the sighted individuals were
blindfolded before entering the testing room and throughout the
entire experiment in order to exclude any visual information of the
spatial context. As shown in rats, animals rely heavily on idiothetic
information to travel in space when vision is not available (Wishaw
et al., 1997). Sighted participants were blindfolded 15 min prior
to the beginning of the behavioural tasks. Afterwards, while
remaining blindfolded, all participants were then familiarized with
the maze setting by exploring, with the aid of the experimenter, a
small portion of the maze. As a result, all subjects were blindfolded
for about half an hour prior to testing.
In order to eliminate a possible discrepancy between the groups
in attention abilities, the digit span subtest from the Weschler
Adult Intelligence Scale III (Weschler, 1997) was used to assess
working memory and attention.
Maze tasks
Two
different
tasks
were
administrated
in
a
human-sized
experimental labyrinth setting formed by a series of panels
(1 m  2 m) occupying a space of 9 m  15 m. The protocol used
for the spatial tasks in the labyrinth was developed in earlier
studies (Passini et al., 1990; Chouinard et al., 2003).
Learning a route task
The first navigational task consisted of learning a series of routes
in a human-size maze which rely on linear acquisition of
information. Subjects memorized a route once, and then had to
follow the same path a number of times while trying to make as
few errors as possible. The participants were first guided once by
the experimenter in the labyrinth along a predetermined path and
were invited to explore the space along the way in order to learn
and memorize the specific path taken. The experimenter walked in
front of the participant and guided him/her by repeatedly saying
‘this
way’
while
the
participants
were
touching
the
walls
surrounding them. When the guided tour of the route was
completed, the participants were brought back to the starting
point where they were invited to follow the same path by
themselves while the experimenter, walking behind, pointed out
and corrected their errors. This was done by touching the
participants and placing them in the correct orientation without
giving any information on the spatial context (for example, ‘turn
left here’). This procedure was repeated five times. There were
four different paths increasing in complexity. The complexity of
the path was related to the number of decision points (6, 8, 10 or
12, see Fig. 1). The different degrees of complexity were obtained
by moving walls in order to change the setting of the maze. The
errors committed by the participants were noted on a sheet by the
experimenter. An error was noted each time a participant entered
an incorrect alley by crossing with their two feet an imaginary line
going from the decision point into the alley. Only one error could
be made at each decision point for each trial because participants
were then redirected in the correct alley.
Pointing task
The participants were brought to three different points in the
labyrinth. At each new point, they had to point as precisely as
possible towards the starting point or towards the last pointing
position (Fig. 3). They had to do so by placing their foot on a
specific mark on the floor and extending their arm along the axis
of the body in the estimated direction. The angle was measured by
2996
Brain (2008), 131, 2995^3005
M. Fortin et al.
 at McGill University Libraries on October 11, 2012
http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 


holding a stick against the end of the arm of the participant and
reporting the position of the arm on a protractor positioned on
the floor. The degree of difference was then computed by sub-
tracting the position of the arm from the actual correct direction.
Spatial layout task
The participants were conducted to a small room (4 m  5 m)
adjacent to the labyrinth. In order to discover the principles of the
spatial organization of a small spatial layout placed within the
room using the same panels as for the labyrinth, they were asked
to freely explore this spatial layout by walking through it. There
were
two
different
configurations
with
different
degrees
of
complexity, each of which was presented in a counterbalanced
manner across all subjects in each group (Fig. 4). The walls were
placed according to an axial symmetrical layout and a central
symmetrical layout. All the subjects explored each layout once at
their leisure. Right after the exploration of the first layout
presented to them, the participants explored five small-scale
models with their hands and then chose the correct model
representing the explored layout (one represented the correct
configuration and the four others contained one or two errors).
This procedure was repeated for the second layout. A correct
identification was noted when a participant chose the correct
small-scale model from all the models presented. The difference
between each erroneous small-scale model and the correct one was
limited to only one cue (one error) for the complex configuration
and to two cues (two errors) for the simple one.
Anatomical data
Image acquisition and pre-processing
For
each
participant,
high-resolution
volumetric
MRI
was
performed on a Siemens 1.5 Tesla Magnetom Vision MRI scanner
(Siemens,
Erlangen,
Germany)
at
the
Notre-Dame
Hospital
(CHUM). Each participant was investigated with a high-resolution
(1  1  1 mm, T1-weighted 3D) sagittally oriented MRI echo
sequence with TR: 1100; TE: 4.38; flip angle of 15; 256  256
matrix and FOV: 250.
Following acquisition, the native MR images were transferred to
a Linux workstation. A combination of different algorithms was
used to prepare the raw MRI volumes for manual segmentation.
The images were first corrected for intensity non-uniformity (Sled
et al., 1998) and then registered into standard stereotaxic space
based on the MNI 152 template (Collins et al., 1994) to account
for individual differences in head size. These pre-processing steps
reduce inter-scan variability due to scan artifacts and correct for
global brain size differences.
The segmentation and volumetric analyses were performed
using DISPLAY, a software developed at the McConnell Brain
Imaging Centre of the Montreal Neurological Institute. This
program allows simultaneous viewing and navigating in brain
volumes in coronal, sagittal and horizontal orientations in 1 mm
slice intervals (Fig. 5).
Image analysis
The anatomical boundaries used for segmentation have been
described in detail elsewhere (Pruessner et al., 2000). In short, the
procedures described below for delineation of the hippocampus
were employed.
The most posterior part of the hippocampus was defined as the
first appearance of ovoid mass of grey matter inferiomedial to the
trigone of the lateral ventricle (TLV). The lateral border at this
point was the TLV, whereas medially, the border was identified by
the presence of white matter. Further anteriorly, an arbitrary
border was defined for the superior and medial border of the
hippocampus, in order to differentiate hippocampus grey matter
from the grey matter of the Andreas Retzius gyrus, the fasciolar
gyrus and the crus of the fornix.
For the hippocampus body, the most visible inferolateral layer of
grey matter was excluded, assuming that it actually represents
entorhinal cortex. Next, the white matter band at the superomedial
level of the hippocampus body, the fimbria, was included. If grey
matter was found superior to the fimbria, the first row of grey
matter was also included. The dentate gyrus, located between the
four California regions in the hippocampal formation, together with
the California regions themselves and part of the subiculum, were
included. The subiculum was divided by drawing a straight line with
an angle of approximately 45 from the most inferior part of the
hippocampus medially to the cistern if no white matter delineation
was visible between these two structures. The lateral border at this
point was identified by the inferior horn of the lateral ventricle.
The hippocampus head was defined by the emergence of the
uncal recess in the superomedial region of the hippocampus. The
most important structures for identification of lateral, anterior
and superior borders of the head were the uncal recess of the
inferior horn of the lateral ventricle and the alveus. Besides the
coronal view, the sagittal and horizontal views were employed for
identification of the anterior border of the hippocampus.
This protocol with proven reliability and validity has been
implemented in numerous studies (Pruessner et al., 2000, 2001;
Buss et al., 2007) and benefits from superior visualization of the
target structures in 3D (coronal, sagittal and horizontal). The intra-
rater intra-class reliability coefficients ranged between 0.81 and 0.84
for one rater (P.V.) measuring the hippocampi in four participants
two subsequent times, with at least 1 month elapsing between
consecutive measurements. The intra-rater intra-class reliability
coefficients ranged between 0.86 and 1.00 for one rater (M.F.)
dividing the hippocampi in three parts for the same four participants.
The inter-rater intra-class reliability coefficients range between 0.73
and 0.82 for two raters (P.V. and C.L.) measuring hippocampal
volumes independently in eight randomly selected MRI scans. The
inter-rater intra-class reliability coefficients range between 0.99
and 1.00 for two raters (M.F. and C.L.) dividing the hippocampus
in three parts for the same eight participants. All the raters were
blind with respect to the group and performance of the subjects.
Results
Behavioural data
There was no difference between the blind and the sighted
on
the
digit
span
subtest
from
the
Weschler
Adult
Intelligence
Scale
III
(Weschler,
1997).
A
one-way
ANOVA (analysis of variance) between the early and late
blind participants revealed no significant group effect
(P40.05). Similar results were found, using the same test,
for the blind participants pooled together and their paired
sighted controls (P40.05). Hence, the differences obtained
on the other task cannot be attributable to a discrepancy in
working memory or attentional abilities.
Wayfinding and hippocampal size in the blind
Brain (2008), 131, 2995^3005
2997
 at McGill University Libraries on October 11, 2012
http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 


In the ‘learning a route’ task, the participants were required
to follow a specific path in the human size maze, to which they
had been previously exposed, while keeping errors to a
minimum. There were four different routes to learn, each
presented for five trials. Each new route increased in its level of
difficulty by augmenting the number of decision points by 2
(6 decision points for the first route; 12 for the fourth). The
number of errors for each trial was computed and the five
trials were pooled in order to obtain the total number of errors
for each route. An analysis of the performance on this task was
first examined with respect to whether the blindness occurred
early or later in life. For these participants, a two (early blind
versus late blind) by four (complexity of the routes) repeated
measures ANOVA revealed no significant effects between
the two groups of blind participants [F(1,17) = 0.183;
P40.05].
There
was
a
route
effect
[F(3,51) = 25.536;
P  0.001],
the
number
of
errors
generally
increasing
with the number of decision points. There were no sig-
nificant interactions between the groups (early and late blind)
and the complexity of the routes [F(3,51) = 1.850; P40.05].
Hence, the blind participants were pooled together for
comparison with the sighted controls. A two (blind versus
sighted) by four (complexity of the routes) repeated
measures ANOVA was carried out. As was the case for
the analysis involving only the blind participants, there was
a route effect [F(3,108) = 64.85; P  0.001], the number of
errors generally increasing with the number of decision
points. The analysis revealed a significant effect between the
blind and the sighted [F(1,36) = 4.352; P  0.05], with the
blind making in total less errors (mean = 63.26 errors,
SE = 3.94) than the sighted (mean = 75.16 errors, SE = 4.12)
(Fig. 1). A trend was found for the interaction between
complexity of the routes and visual experience (blind versus
sighted) [F(3,108) = 2.394; P = 0.08]. A contrast analysis was
Fig. 1 The learning a route task. (A) The 6 decision points path. (B) The eight decision points path. (C) The 10 decision points path.
(D) The 12 decision points path. The subjects were first guided along the path, as indicated by the arrows, from the starting point S to
the finish point F. They were then asked to follow the same path by themselves five times.The numbers of errors made by the sighted
(in black) and blind (in grey) subjects for each route (A, B,C and D) are illustrated in the graph.
2998
Brain (2008), 131, 2995^3005
M. Fortin et al.
 at McGill University Libraries on October 11, 2012
http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 


conducted in order to determine which routes differed
between the blind and sighted. This analysis showed that
the number of errors committed for the more complex
route (12 decision points) was larger for the sighted indi-
viduals than for the blind [P  0.01 (blind: mean = 22.89
errors, SE = 1.34; sighted: mean = 29.16 errors, SE = 1.95)].
There was also a difference for the easiest route (6 decision
points), whereby the sighted made more errors then the
blind individuals [P = 0.04 (blind: mean = 10.16 errors,
SE = 0.86; sighted: mean = 13.16 errors, SE = 1.11)]. There
were no significant differences between the sighted and the
blind for the other two routes (8 and 10 decision points).
In addition, Fig. 2 clearly illustrates that differences between
groups were not attributable to different learning rates.
Additional repeated measures ANOVA were also performed
for each route with the trials serving as the repeated
factor. The lack of significant interactions between the
trial variable and the group variable [with the exception
of
route
3;
F(4,144) = 2.605,
P = 0.045]
also
supports
the notion that both groups did not differ in terms of
learning rate.
In the ‘pointing’ task, the participants were guided to
three different locations in the labyrinth. At each new
location, they had to point as precisely as possible towards
the starting point or towards the last pointing location. An
analysis of performance on this task was first examined
with respect to whether the blindness occurred early or later
in life. For these participants, a two (early blind versus late
blind) by three (pointing locations) repeated measures
ANOVA revealed no significant effects between the two
groups
of
blind
participants
[F(1,17) = 0.86;
P40.05].
There
was
a
pointing
location
effect
[F(2,34) = 4.02;
P  0.05], the degree of errors generally increasing for
each new pointing location. There were no significant
interactions between the groups (early and late blind) and
the different pointing location (P40.05). Again, the blind
participants were pooled together for comparison with the
sighted controls. A two (blind versus sighted) by three
(pointing locations) repeated measures ANOVA was carried
out. As was the case for the analysis involving only the
blind participants, there was a pointing location effect
[F(2,72) = 7.355; P  0.001], the number of errors generally
increasing for each new pointing location. The analysis
revealed no significant effect [F(1,36) = 0.702; P = 0.408)]
between the blind (mean = 57.09 errors, SE = 8.21) and the
sighted (mean = 68.18 errors, SE = 10.38) and no significant
interactions between the groups (blind and sighted) and the
different pointing location (P40.05) (see graph of Fig. 3).
In the ‘spatial layout’ task, the participants were told to
freely explore the spatial layout of a small maze in order to
familiarize themselves with its spatial organization (Fig. 4).
Following this exploration, the participants had to choose
the correct model out of five small-scale models represent-
ing the layout they had just explored. There were two
different configurations with different degrees of complex-
ity. The difference between each erroneous small-scale
Fig. 2 Effect of learning. Learning curves for both the blind and sighted participants across the five trials for all four paths. It can be
seen that both groups show similar learning rates for all paths.
Wayfinding and hippocampal size in the blind
Brain (2008), 131, 2995^3005
2999
 at McGill University Libraries on October 11, 2012
http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 


model and the good one was limited to only one cue
for the complex configuration and to two cues for the
simple one.
For the complex configuration (one cue), a chi-square
analysis showed that significantly more blind participants
succeeded in performing the task in comparison to the
sighted subjects (2
(1) = 3,89; P  0.05). However, there was
no difference between the number of blind and sighted
participants who succeeded in the simple configuration
task where more cues were available (2
(1) = 0.11, P40.05)
(see graph of Fig. 4).
The type of strategy used by the subjects from the two
groups was compared. Generally, they used one of two
strategies: they either simply moved along the perimeter of
the room to which were attached the panels (border
evaluation) or they also tried to understand the general
layout by touching the different panels and establish some
relationship between them (border and layout evaluation).
Based on previous experiments with the apparatus the two
types
of
strategies
were
already
identified
and
the
experimenter simply observed the participants as they
were exploring the layout in order to determine which
strategy was used. Again, there was no difference between
the proportion of blind and sighted participants in their
preferred strategy for exploring the set of panels making up
the space (2
(1) = 1.42, P40.05).
Anatomical data
Grey matter volume of the hippocampus was first examined
for difference as a function of whether the blindness
occurred early or later in life. For these participants, a two
(early blind and late blind) by two (hemisphere) by three
(structure: head, body and tail of the hippocampus)
repeated measures ANOVA revealed no significant effects
between the early and the late blind [F(1,17) = 0.133;
P40.05]. There was a structure effect [F(2,34) = 148.001;
P  0.001], the head of the hippocampus being larger than
the body (P50.001) which in turn was larger than the
tail (P50.001). There were no significant interactions
between group (early versus late blind) and structure
[F(2,34) = 0.058; P40.05] (Fig. 5). The lack of differences
between the early- and late-blind group could not be
attributable to the age or the sex of the participants since
they
did
not
differ
for
these
characteristics
[Age:
t(17) = 1.130, P40.05; Sex: 2 Fisher’s Exact Test (two
sided) P40.05].
Hence, the blind participants were pooled together for
comparison with the sighted controls. A two (blind versus
sighted) by two (hemisphere) by three (structure: head,
body and tail of the hippocampus) repeated measures
ANOVA revealed a significant effect between the blind and
the sighted [F(1,36) = 6.314; P  0.01], with the blind
showing a larger hippocampal volume than the sighted
(blind:
mean = 4237.00 mm3,
SE = 107.53;
sighted:
mean = 3905.74 mm3, SE = 76.27).
As was the case for the analysis involving only the blind
participants, there was a structure effect [F(2,72) = 356.346;
P50.001], the head of the hippocampus being larger
than the body (P50.001) which in turn was larger than the
tail (P50.001). A significant interaction between structure
and hemisphere was found [F(2,72) = 8.358; P  0.001],
with
the
body
being
larger
in
the
left
hemisphere
(P = 0.006)
and
the
head
being
larger
in
the
right
hemisphere (P = 0.008) while the tail volume did not
differ between hemispheres for both blind and sighted
participants (P40.05) (Fig. 4). A trend was also found for
the interaction between structure and visual experience
(blind versus sighted) [F(2,72) = 2.354; P50.1]. A contrast
analysis was conducted in order to determine which part of
the hippocampus differed between the blind and sighted.
Fig. 3 The pointing task. (A) The subjects were guided from the
departure point D to the first pointing position 1 and were then
asked to point towards the departure point D.They were then
guided to the second pointing position 2 and asked to point
towards the first pointing position 1. Finally, they were guided to
the third pointing position 3 and were asked to point towards the
second pointing position 2. (B) Shows the performance of the
sighted and the blind.
3000
Brain (2008), 131, 2995^3005
M. Fortin et al.
 at McGill University Libraries on October 11, 2012
http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 


This analysis showed that the overall head volume (left
and
right
hemisphere
combined)
was
larger
in
the
blind individuals [P  0.05 (blind: mean = 2527.08 mm3,
SE = 111.27;
sighted:
mean = 2250.76 mm3,
SE = 73.32)],
while there was no significant difference between the
blind
and
the
sighted
for
the
hippocampus
body
(P40.05) and the hippocampus tail (P40.05).
Correlational analyses
Given the significant differences between groups observed
both for the maze task as well as for the hippocampal
volume, it is only natural to see if both data sets correlated
with one another. Although the volume of the right head of
the hippocampus did not significantly correlate with the
overall results of each of the routes (P40.05), the total
volume of the right hippocampus did correlate with
the data from the fourth route, the most difficult one
(r = –0.326; P = 0.046). The negative relationship simply
implies that the larger the volume of the right hippocam-
pus, the less errors a subject committed (Fig. 6). In
addition, we found no significant correlation between the
age of the onset of blindness with the volume of the right
head (r = 0.073; P = 0.766), the right hippocampus (0.106;
P = 0.665) and the total hippocampal volume (r = 0.055;
P = 0.823), thus supporting our decision to pool both blind
groups together for our analyses.
Discussion
The results presented above provide clear evidence of
structural differences between blind and sighted individuals.
Indeed, there was a significant difference in the overall
volume of the hippocampus between the blind and the
sighted. The involvement of this structure in spatial tasks
has been demonstrated in many studies. For instance,
structural differences in taxi drivers in comparison to
controls concerned the hippocampus (Maguire et al., 2000).
More generally, imaging studies have demonstrated the
activation of this structure in association with navigational
tasks (Maguire et al., 1997; Mellet et al., 2000; Hartley et al.,
2003; Iaria et al., 2003). Furthermore, the importance of the
temporal lobe as a whole for path integration has been
clearly established by studies in humans with temporal
lobectomy (Worsley et al., 2001).
In the current study, the difference in hippocampal
volume between groups mainly lies within the anterior
portion, namely the hippocampus head. Although it is not
known for its implication in spatial processing, Maguire
and colleagues (2006) have shown a possible link between
the head of the hippocampus and visuo-spatial memory.
The head of the hippocampus has also been typically
associated with verbal memory (Hackert et al., 2002).
Keeping this in mind, it is possible that during the ‘learning
a route’ task, subjects were simply verbally storing path
information as a string of right and left turns as opposed to
Fig. 4 The spatial layout task.The left portion of the figure shows the axial symmetrical layout of the complex configuration (A) along
with the five small-scale models from which the participants had to choose the correct representation (in this case 4a). In the right
portion of the figure is shown the central symmetrical layout of the simple configuration (B) along with the different configurations
from which the subjects had to choose the correct response (in this case 3b). In the middle graph, the performance of the sighted
and the blind is shown.
Wayfinding and hippocampal size in the blind
Brain (2008), 131, 2995^3005
3001
 at McGill University Libraries on October 11, 2012
http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 


learning an allocentric representation of the space. Thus, a
volume increase of this part of the structure could also be
related to an enhanced use of memory by blind individuals,
as observed in previous studies (Ro¨der et al., 2001; Amedi
et
al.,
2003,
2004;
Raz
et
al.,
2005).
Although
the
aforementioned
studies
related
performance
in
verbal
memory tasks to
primary visual cortex activation,
it
remains nonetheless possible that an additional contribu-
tion came from the hippocampus head.
A very recent study also examined hippocampal volume
differences between blind and sighted individuals (Chebat
et al., 2007). They found that the volume of the right
posterior hippocampus was significantly reduced compared
to sighted controls. Although their findings appear at odds
with
the
ones
presented
here,
they
are
not
entirely
incompatible. In fact, another recent study found both
sets of differences between blind and sighted hippocampal
volumes: a larger anterior and a smaller posterior region in
the right hippocampus (Lepore et al., 2008). The latter
study used a new surface mapping algorithm (see Shi et al.,
Fig. 5 Segmented hippocampus. In (A) the saggital, (B) coronal and (C) horizontal plane.The yellowgreen scale corresponds to the right
hippocampus and the blue-purple scale to the left hippocampus.The head (dark green) can clearly be distinguished from both the body
(light green) and tail (yellowgreen) in the saggital slice.The mean total and partial hippocampal volumes for both the early blind (green),
the late blind (orange) and the sighted (yellow) are shown in the graph.
Fig. 6 Brainçbehaviour correlation. Seen here is the right hippo-
campus volume plotted against the error scores on the fourth
learned route for both blind and sighted subjects. When both
groups were pooled together, a significant correlation was
observed between the above-mentioned variables.The sighted
subjects tended to have smaller right hippocampal volumes asso-
ciated with poorer performance on the behavioural task as
opposed to the blind subjects in which the opposite pattern was
observed.
3002
Brain (2008), 131, 2995^3005
M. Fortin et al.
 at McGill University Libraries on October 11, 2012
http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 


2007), suggesting that the differences between the studies
could have a methodological basis. Moreover, Chebat et al
(2007) used predefined cut-offs to segment the hippocam-
pus (with the most anterior quarter of the slices being
counted as the head, the posterior quarter of the slices as
the tail, leaving the intermediate slices as the body), which
could explain the discrepancies between the results of both
studies. Nevertheless, both the findings of Chebat et al.
(2007)
and
the
current
findings
presented
here
are
supported by the data provided by Lepore et al. (2008),
suggesting
that
both
differences
could
exist
in
blind
individuals, and may reflect adaptive responses to sensory
deprivation
and/or
be
driven
by
increased
functional
demands on memory systems.
Because of the global enhancement in hippocampal
volume in blind participants, a structure involved in spatial
navigation, we wanted to investigate whether this would
lead to behavioral enhancements in these individuals with
respect to spatial tasks. A recent study also examined the
effects of visual deprivation on spatial cognition and
showed that blind individuals can perform better than
sighted ones across a series of spatial tasks (Tinti et al.,
2006). While some of their tasks were quite similar to ours,
they did not evaluate navigational skills during route
learning per se, which was the primary objective in the
current study. Our results show that blind individuals are
indeed better at learning complex paths within a maze
compared to blindfolded sighted subjects. These results
extend previous findings regarding spatial navigation and
the blind (Passini et al., 1990) where no difference between
blind and blindfolded sighted subjects was found when
learning a new route in the labyrinth. However, the routes
used were relatively easy with only 3 and 5 decision points
(compared with 6, 8, 10 and 12 for the current study).
Consistent with their results, our easier routes produced
very little difference between groups, with the exception of
the first route. One explanation for this might be that since
the 6-decision point route was the first task performed by
all subjects, it is possible that the sighted subjects, who
suddenly had to navigate in unfamiliar territory without
eyesight for the first time, committed more errors than they
would have had if they had more experience with the maze
setting or if they had been blindfolded for a longer period
of time. After completing the first route and consequently
familiarizing
themselves
better
with
the
maze,
their
performance increased and reached a level similar to that
of the blind for the following two routes (routes 2 and 3).
Therefore, it would seem that tasks with few decision points
may be too easy for both the blind and the sighted and that
the lack of difference between groups is simply result of a
ceiling effect. The superior abilities of the blind became
more
apparent
as
task
difficulty
increased
(especially
notable for 12 decision points), which is probably more
representative of real life situations. Moreover, it is this
route that significantly correlated with right hippocampal
volume, indicating that the larger the right hippocampus,
the fewer errors the subjects committed. This is an
impressive finding given that this is the first study to
show a link between a cerebral structure and spatial abilities
in blind individuals. Finally, it is noteworthy to mention
that while both groups showed learning effects (albeit
slight) across the five trials for each route, they did not
differ in terms of their learning rates.
A significant difference was also found when comparing
the
number
of
blind
individuals
and
paired
control
participants who successfully identified the correct small
scale model corresponding to the spatial layout they had
previously explored when only one cue was available. This
suggests that blind individuals are better than the sighted at
understanding and encoding spatial information when only
idiothetic cues are available. It has been argued that blind
individuals tend to be better when they use an idiothetic
frame of reference when encoding spatial information
in
large
scale
environments
(Noordzij
et
al.,
2006)
and especially if they have lost sight at an early age
(Millar, 1994; Thinus-Blanc and Gaunet, 1997). The present
results do not seem to support the latter part of this
statement because no difference was found between the
early and late blind group on the different spatial tasks. It is
worth noting that blind subjects have more experience in
dealing with tactile stimuli, and therefore might be better at
extracting information about shapes from touch as opposed
to simply a superior spatial memory. Perhaps the actual
answers lie in the form of some combination of the two
mechanisms.
As far as the pointing task is concerned, there was no
significant difference between the performance of blind and
sighted individuals. While this could be explained by the
fact that pointing in a specific direction is not a behaviour
used often by blind persons since such behaviour relies
more on allocentric-based knowledge of the environment,
our blind subjects did on average perform better although
the difference did not reach statistical significance (mostly
attributable to large variances). In addition, Tinti et al.
(2006) also had their blind subjects perform a similar
pointing task and showed that they were significantly better
than the sighted subjects. This difference could be explained
by the fact that in our study, subjects made significantly
more turns in the maze before being asked to point
compared with the pointing task in Tinti et al. (2006). It
could therefore be argued that our pointing task might have
been
too
difficult
to
enable
the
observation
of
any
substantial differences between our groups. Taking these
facts into account, it would nonetheless seem that blind
individuals are better able to situate themselves in their
environment with respect to a specific reference point.
The absence of structural differences in the posterior
portion of the hippocampus (hippocampal tail) and the
finding that blind individuals perform better than sighted
individuals on different spatial tasks are not incompatible.
In fact, in the general population, variations in navigational
skills alone are not associated with structural differences
Wayfinding and hippocampal size in the blind
Brain (2008), 131, 2995^3005
3003
 at McGill University Libraries on October 11, 2012
http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 


(Maguire et al., 2003). Maguire and collaborators submitted
participants to different spatial tasks, including navigation
in a virtual reality town, recognition of an environmental
scene from the visited town, construction of a map of the
town and a standardized topographical memory test. None
of those tasks were related to the grey matter volume of the
hippocampus.
Furthermore,
the
posterior
part
of
the
hippocampus has been related to the use of allocentric
information (Mellet et al., 2000). It has also been argued
that taxi drivers and controls differ on the kind of spatial
representation they use. Taxi drivers tend to use a more
integrated representation of space (allocentric) than normal
controls (Maguire et al., 2000). Therefore, it is possible that
the enhancement of grey matter volume in the posterior
part of the hippocampus of taxi drivers is linked to their
increased use of an allocentric frame of reference. In
marked contrast, however, it has been hypothesized that
blind individuals rely mostly on an egocentric frame of
reference to process spatial information (Thinus-Blanc and
Gaunet, 1997), which could explain why no volume
difference was found in the posterior portion of the
hippocampus.
Worthy of mention is the fact that we did not measure
volumes elsewhere in the brain nor did we have a control
structure. This leaves open the possibility that other
structural changes may exist in the adult brain of blind
individuals. Moreover, the hippocampal changes seen here
could result from changes elsewhere having a knock-on
effect in our analyses due to the need for scaling for global
brain size.
In summary, the present results revealed larger volumes of
the anterior (head) portions of the hippocampus in blind
individuals compared with sighted controls. These hippo-
campal volume differences were paralleled by multiple
behavioural enhancements in the former. These individuals
did in fact show superior navigational skills when learning
new paths in a maze setting and also demonstrated superior
recognition of small-scale tactile layouts representing spatial
environments they had previously explored. Further research
is required to better understand the role of the anterior
hippocampus in spatial navigation in the blind. The reported
difference might not be the result of altered spatial
navigational abilities, but rather the result of increased use
of memory functions, albeit for spatial tasks, in the blind.
Funding
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (F.L. and M.L.); Fonds
de la Recherche en Sante´ du Que´bec; Fond de Recherche en
Ophtalmologie de l’Universite´
de Montre´al (FROUM);
Re´seau de recherche en sante´ de la vision (M.F.).
References
Amedi A, Floel A, Knecht S, Zohary E, Cohen LG. Transcranial magnetic
stimulation of the occipital pole interferes with verbal processing in
blind subjects. Nat Neurosci 2004; 7: 1266–70.
Amedi A, Raz N, Pianka P, Malach R, Zohary E. Early ‘visual’ cortex
activation correlates with superior verbal memory performance in the
blind. Nat Neurosci 2003; 6: 758–66.
Barnea A, Nottebohm F. Seasonal recruitment of hippocampal neurons in
adult free-ranging black-capped chickadees. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1994; 91:
11217–21.
Barrash J, Damasio H, Adolphs R, Tranel D. The neuroanatomical
correlates of route learning impairment. Neuropsychologia 2000; 8:
820–36.
Burgess N, Maguire EA, O’Keefe J. The human hippocampus and spatial
and episodic memory. Neuron 2002; 35: 625–41.
Buss C, Lord C, Wadiwalla M, Hellhammer DH, Lupien SJ, Meaney MJ,
et al. Maternal care modulates the relationship between prenatal risk
and hippocampal volume in women but not in men. J Neurosci 2007;
27: 2592–5.
Chebat DR, Chen JK, Schneider F, Ptito A, Kupers R, Ptito M. Alterations
in right posterior hippocampus in early blind individuals. NeuroReport
2007; 18: 329–33.
Chouinard SB, Brie`re ME, Rainville C, Godbout R. Correlation between
evening and morning waking EEG and spatial orientation. Brain Cogn
2003; 53: 162–5.
Clayton NS, Krebs JR. Hippocampal growth and attrition in birds affected
by experience. Proc Natl Acad Sci 1994; 91: 7410–14.
Collins DL, Neelin P, Peters TM, Evans AC. Automatic 3D intersubject
registration of MR volumetric data in standardized Talairach space.
J Comput Assist Tomogr 1994; 18: 192–205.
Colombo
M,
Fernandez
T,
Nakamura
KA,
Gross
CG.
Functional
differentiation along the anterior-posterior axis of the hippocampus in
monkeys. J Neurophysiol 1998; 80: 1002–5.
Ghaem O, Mellet E, Crivello F, Tzourio N, Mazoyer B, Berthoz A, et al.
Mental navigation along memorized routes activates the hippocampus,
precuneus and insula. NeuroReport 1997; 8: 739–44.
Hackert VH, den Heijer T, Oudkerk M, Koudstaal PJ, Hofman A,
Breteler MM. Hippocampal head size associated with verbal memory
performance in non-demented elderly. Neuroimage 2002; 17: 1365–72.
Hartley T, Maguire EA, Spiers HJ, Burgess N. The well-worn route and the
path
less
traveled,
distinct
neural
bases
of
route
following
and
wayfinding in humans. Neuron 2003; 37: 878–88.
Iaria G, Petrides M, Dagher A, Pike B, Bohbot V. Cognitive strategies
dependent
on the hippocampus
and caudate
nucleus in human
navigation, variability and change with practice. J Neurosci 2003; 23:
5945–52.
Lee DW, Miyasato LE, Clayton NS. Neurobiological bases of spatial
learning in the natural environment, neurogenesis and growth in the
avian and mammalian hippocampus. NeuroReport 1998; 9: R15–27.
Lepore N, Shi Y, Lepore F, Fortin M, Voss P, Chou YY, et al. Patterns
of hippocampal shape and volume differences in blind subjects.
NeuroImage 2008.
Maguire EA, Burgess N, Donnett JG, Frackowiak RS, Frith CD, O’Keefe J.
Knowing where and getting there, a human navigation network. Science
1998; 280: 921–4.
Maguire EA, Frackowiak RSJ, Frith CD. Recalling routes around London,
activation of the right hippocampus in taxi drivers. J Neurosci 1997; 17:
7103–10.
Maguire
EA,
Gadian
DG,
Johnsrude
IS,
Good
CD,
Ashburner
J,
Frackowiak RS, et al. Navigation-related structural change in the
hippocampi of taxi drivers. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2000; 97: 4398–403.
Maguire EA, Spiers HJ, Good CD, Hartley T, Frackowiak RS, Burgess N.
Navigation expertise and the human hippocampus, A structural brain
imaging analysis. Hippocampus 2003; 13: 250–9.
Maguire EA, Woollett K, Spiers HJ. London taxi drivers and bus drivers: a
structural MRI and neuropsychological analysis. Hippocampus 2006; 16:
1091–101.
Mellet E, Briscogne S, Tzourio-Mazoyer N, Ghaem O, Petit L, Zago L, et al.
Neural correlates of topographic mental exploration, the impact of
route versus survey perspective learning. NeuroImage 2000; 12: 588–600.
3004
Brain (2008), 131, 2995^3005
M. Fortin et al.
 at McGill University Libraries on October 11, 2012
http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 


Millar S. Understanding and representing space. Theory and evidence
from studies with blind and sighted children. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1994.
Morris RG, Garrud P, Rawlins JN, O’Keefe J. Place navigation impaired in
rats with hippocampal lesions. Nature 1982; 297: 681–3.
Moser E, Moser MB, Andersen P. Spatial learning impairment parallels the
magnitude
of
dorsal
hippocampal
lesions,
but is
hardly
present
following ventral lesions. J Neurosci 1993; 13: 3916–25.
Noordzij ML, Zuidhoek S, Postma A. The influence of visual experience
on the ability to form spatial models based on route and survey
description. Cognition 2006; 100: 321–42.
Oldfield OD. The assessment and analysis of handedness, the Edinburg
Inventory. Neuropsychologia 1971; 9: 97–113.
Passini R, Proulx G, Rainville C. The spatio-cognitive abilities of the
visually impaired population. Environ Behav 1990; 22: 91–118.
Pruessner JC, Li LM, Serles W, Pruessner M, Collins DL, Kabani N, et al.
Volumetry of hippocampus and amygdala with high-resolution MRI
and three-dimensional analysis software, minimizing the discrepancies
between laboratories. Cereb Cortex 2000; 10: 433–42.
Pruessner JC, Collins DL, Pruessner M, Evans AC. Age and gender predict
volume decline in the anterior and posterior hippocampus in early
adulthood. J Neurosci 2001; 21: 194–200.
Raz N, Amedi A, Zohary E. V1 Activation in congenitally
blind
humans is associated with episodic retrieval. Cereb Cortex 2005; 15:
1459–68.
Ro¨der B, Ro¨sler F, Neville HJ. Auditory memory in congenitally blind
adults, a behavioral-electrophysiological investigation. Cogn Brain Res
2001; 11: 289–303.
Shi Y, Thompson PM, de Zubicaray GI, Rose SE, Tu Z, Dinov I,
Toga AW. Direct mapping of hippocampal surfaces with intrinsic shape
context. Neuroimage 2007; 37: 792–807.
Sled JG, Zijdenbos AP, Evans AC. A nonparametric method for automatic
correction of intensity nonuniformity in MRI data. IEEE Trans Med
Imaging 1998; 17: 87–97.
Strelow ER. What is needed for a theory of mobility. Direct perception
and cognitive maps – lessons from the blind. Psychol Rev 1985; 92:
226–48.
Thinus-Blanc C, Gaunet F. Representation of space in blind persons, vision
as a spatial sense? Psychol Bull 1997; 121: 20–42.
Tinti C, Adenzato M, Tamietto M, Cornoldi C. Visual experience is not
necessary for efficient spatial cognition: evidence from blindness. Q J
Exp Psychol 2006; 59: 1306–28.
Vargha-Khadem
F,
Gadian
DG,
Watkins
KE,
Connelly
A,
Van
Paesschen W, Mishkin M. Differential effects of early hippocampal
pathology on episodic and semantic memory. Science 1997; 277: 376–80.
Weschler D. Weschler Adult Intelligence Scale III. United States of
America: The Psychological Corporation, 1997.
Whishaw IQ, Hines DJ, Wallace DG. Dead reckoning (path integration)
requires
the
hippocampal
formation,
evidence
from
spontaneous
exploration and spatial learning tasks in light (allothetic) and dark
(idiothetic) tests. Behav Brain Res 2001; 127: 49–69.
Whishaw IQ, McKenna JE, Maaswinkel H. Hippocampal lesions and path
integration. Curr Opin Neurobiol 1997; 7: 228–34.
Worsley CL, Recce M, Spiers HJ, Marley J, Polkey CE, Morris RG. Path
integration following temporal lobectomy in humans. Neuropsychologia
2001; 39: 452–64.
Wayfinding and hippocampal size in the blind
Brain (2008), 131, 2995^3005
3005
 at McGill University Libraries on October 11, 2012
http://brain.oxfordjournals.org/
Downloaded from 


