Applied Ergonomics 94 (2021) 103398
Available online 12 March 2021
0003-6870/© 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Navigating with Augmented Reality – How does it affect drivers’ 
mental load? 
Kassandra Bauerfeind a,*, Julia Drüke a, Jens Schneider b, Adrian Haar a, Lennart Bendewald c, 
Martin Baumann d 
a Volkswagen AG, Group Innovation, HMI Augmentation, Wolfsburg, Germany 
b Volkswagen AG, Technical Development, Infotainment Services, Wolfsburg, Germany 
c Volkswagen AG, Technical Development, HMI Domain Concepts, Wolfsburg, Germany 
d University of Ulm, Institute of Psychology and Education Dept., Human Factors, Ulm, Germany   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Augmented Reality 
Head-up display 
Driver’s mental load 
Ambiguous navigation task 
A B S T R A C T   
Drivers have been proven to easily understand Augmented Reality (AR) information. Especially in an ambiguous 
navigation task, drivers are expected to benefit from AR information. The driving simulator study was aimed at 
examining differences in mental load while navigating in an urban area with ambiguous intersection situations 
(N = 59). The navigation information was presented to the driver through a head-up display (HUD): a con­
ventional HUD or an AR display, which relates information to the surroundings. Additionally, the driver had to 
solve a non-driving-related task (NDRT) which was an auditory cognitive, spatial task. Results showed that while 
driving with the AR display, participants performed better in the NDRT, which indicates a reduced mental load 
compared with the HUD. Participants drove on average 3 km/h slower with the HUD, showing compensation 
behaviour.   
1. Introduction 
Navigating is an elementary driving task. It is a spatial task as the 
driver needs to orient himself in the environment. Drivers have to plan 
their routes and estimate costs and risks. For navigating in a foreign 
environment, or in ambiguous navigation scenarios, knowledge based 
behaviour (Rasmussen, 1983) is necessary. This requires the driver’s 
resources and therefore can be cognitively demanding. However, it is 
possible to support the driver through improved displays. Because in­
formation and digitization in general, available traffic-related informa­
tion in the vehicle is increasing, but information should be easy, readily 
accessible, and presented comprehensively without distracting the 
driver. For example, heads-up displays (HUD) enable drivers to receive 
driving related information within their field-of-view. Hence, informa­
tion is readily available enabling concurrent scanning of the information 
provided and the environment (Prinzel and Risser, 2004) and mini­
mizing drivers’ gazes away from the street. However, the information 
presented in a HUD does not necessarily relate to the environment. Thus, 
drivers have to map the 2D information onto the real driving situation. 
This demands drivers’ attention and may lead to navigation and driving 
errors. 
Advanced HUDs are able to present Augmented Reality (AR) infor­
mation, which is directly related to the driving situation. For example, 
while following the navigation arrow presented through an AR display, 
the driver gets the impression that the path-to-follow is virtually marked 
on the street. This might result in the driver easily and quickly under­
standing AR information. As the augmented information is correctly 
superimposed on the relevant objects in the environment, virtual and 
real objects are closer. Thus, the driver no longer has to switch between 
the relevant information and the real traffic situation (Kim and Dey, 
2009). Moreover, with AR the driver does not have to map the virtual 
information onto the environment (Pfannmüller, 2017). Based on these 
advantages, AR is often applied in navigation. AR navigation informa­
tion is intuitive to understand and facilitates the navigation task 
resulting in reduced navigation errors (Bauerfeind et al., 2019; Israel, 
2012; Kim and Dey, 2009). In the Kim and Dey (2009) study, partici­
pants showed enhanced driving performance (e.g., completion time, 
number of missed turns) while driving with AR compared with digital 
maps shown on a center information display. This is in line with 
Medenica et al. (2011), who also found that participants showed an 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: kassandra.bauerfeind@volkswagen.de (K. Bauerfeind).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Applied Ergonomics 
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/apergo 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103398 
Received 13 October 2020; Received in revised form 17 February 2021; Accepted 23 February 2021   


Applied Ergonomics 94 (2021) 103398
2
improved driving performance (i.e., lane position, steering wheel angle) 
while driving with an AR display for a navigation task rather than with a 
standard map-based navigation device or an egocentric street view 
navigation device. The egocentric street view navigation device was an 
LCD display presenting the driving situation from the driver’s perspec­
tive including AR navigation information. 
In the literature, several authors claim that AR navigation informa­
tion requires less mental effort in understanding and interpreting in­
formation compared with navigation information in the HUD (Bengler 
et al., 2015; Israel, 2012; Kim and Dey, 2009; Pfannmüller, 2017; 
Pfannmüller et al., 2015). In the Medenica et al. (2011) study, partici­
pants felt less subjective workload while driving with navigation infor­
mation presented in an AR display than any other navigation device, like 
map-based navigation. Most findings in the field of mental load levels 
with AR are based on subjective ratings. However, subjective data 
(questionnaire data) might be susceptible to distortions caused by social 
desirability. Furthermore, little is known about the effects on objective 
performance measures resulting from lower mental load level with AR. 
If the navigation task with AR (primary task) is less demanding, then the 
driver is more capable of performing better in other tasks (e.g., in a 
non-driving-related task [NDRT]) (Jahn et al., 2005). It must be closely 
observed whether AR information leads to reduced mental load resulting 
in enhanced performance. 
The research presented here is aimed at examining whether AR in­
formation leads to objective performance improvements in terms of a 
lower mental load level compared with HUDs. AR information is likely 
to demand the driver less regarding visual, spatial resources compared 
with information in a HUD. Previous results have shown that AR in­
formation leads to earlier decisions in navigation tasks (cf. Bauerfeind 
et al., 2019). Research is needed into whether this results from a reduced 
mental load level with AR information. Moreover, whether a lower 
mental load level due to AR information eventuates in altered driving 
behaviour in comparison to a HUD must be analysed. This research focus 
is on drivers’ mental load level and driving behaviour while navigating 
with AR information compared with a HUD. It is expected that AR in­
formation demands less mental load than HUDs, especially in ambig­
uous navigation situations (e.g., turning scenarios with many possible 
turns, which are very close to each other). In total, 59 participants had to 
find the target intersection in ambiguous navigation situations in an 
urban 
area. 
Additionally, 
drivers 
had 
to 
accomplish 
a 
non-driving-related task. This NDRT was used to measure the mental 
load while the driver was identifying the target intersection supported 
by visual navigation information presented in the AR display or in the 
HUD. In the study, the performance in the NDRT, driving data, and 
subjective data while approaching the target intersection were analysed. 
2. Method 
2.1. Display types for the navigation task 
Fig. 1 presents the two display types (HUD and AR display) used for 
the navigation task. In the study, the HUD had a perceived projection 
Fig. 1. Display types (HUD and AR display) presenting navigation information in respect of the remaining distance to the target intersection.  
K. Bauerfeind et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Applied Ergonomics 94 (2021) 103398
3
distance of approximately 1–2 m and was presented in 2D. The driver 
received the navigation information 300 m before the target intersection 
in form of a straight blue arrow (Fig. 1a). The turning direction was 
presented to the driver 80 m before the target intersection (Fig. 1b). The 
bar graph next to the blue turning arrow in the HUD indicated the 
remaining distance and was thus reducing while reaching the target 
intersection (Fig. 1b+c). With the AR display, the driver received the 
navigation information 300 m before the target street by way of a tur­
quoise 3D arrow (Fig. 1d). This arrow seemed to be placed onto the 
driving environment. The arrow was sticking out in a 90◦angle, pointing 
into the target intersection (Fig. 1f). 
2.2. Static driving simulator 
The static driving simulator with a mock-up from the Group Inno­
vation of Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft was used to conduct the study. 
This mock-up represented a vehicle with an automatic gear shift. One 
projection screen placed 3.8 m in front of the mock-up with a width of 
3.8 m was used. This resulted in a visual field of 56◦for the driver. The 
projector resolution was 1920 x 1200 pixels. The software Virtual Test 
Drive (Hexagon AB, 2021) was used to implement the simulation world. 
For the two display types (HUD and AR display) the software Unity was 
used. Besides depth cues like motion parallax, a stereo simulation pro­
vided additional realistic depth cues for the participant while observing 
the simulated world and the navigation information. Stereoscopy means 
presenting different pictures from slightly different angles of vision for 
the left and right eye. Hence, an impression of depth results for the 
participant. Therefore, participants had to wear shutter glasses. 
2.3. Driving simulation, driving task, and cognitive, spatial non-driving- 
related task 
The driving scenario used in the study involved straight roads in an 
urban area with 13 intersections per drive without any traffic lights. To 
design ambiguous navigation situations, the distance between the in­
tersections was 40 m. According to the navigation information presented 
in the display (HUD or AR display), the participants’ task was to find the 
target intersection and stop in front of it. When the target intersection 
was identified, participants were asked to switch off the navigation in­
formation with a button on the steering wheel while driving (cf. 
Bauerfeind et al., 2019). The drive was completed when the participant 
stopped in front of the target intersection. The experimenter gave 
feedback after each drive as to whether the decision was correct or 
incorrect. When a wrong intersection was chosen, the participants were 
asked to repeat the drive at the end of the HUD or the AR session. There 
was no other traffic in the streets. According to German regulations, the 
speed limit was 50 km/h. 
To capture the resource demands of the ambiguous navigation task, 
the participants performed an NDRT in addition to the navigation task. 
Like the navigation task, the NDRT in this study was a cognitive and 
spatial task. It was used to measure the mental load while the driver was 
identifying the target intersection with the navigation information. For 
the NDRT, the participants heard numbers from one to nine via two 
speakers, one placed in front and one behind the simulator mock-up. The 
task was to evaluate every number by answering “correct” when hearing 
even numbers from the front speaker, as well as odd numbers from the 
back speaker. Participants had to say “wrong” when hearing odd 
numbers from the front speaker as well as even numbers from the back 
speaker. The interval of the numbers was 2 s. 
A NDRT performance indicates changes in the primary task resource 
demand (Jahn et al., 2005). The NDRT performance is supposed to be 
inversely proportional to the performance in the primary task (Jahn 
et al., 2005): the more demanding the primary task is, the worse the 
NDRT performance gets. In contrast, the driver has more resources free 
to perform better in the NDRT when the primary task is less demanding. 
To measure drivers’ mental load continuously, the NDRT in this study 
was a continuous highly demanding task. The premise of this method is 
the fact that the NDRT fits to the primary task (Jahn et al., 2005). The 
idea is that the primary task and the NDRT overlap to the extent that 
increasing the difficulty of the primary task degrades performance on 
the NDRT. But the NDRT should not be that demanding that it 
completely interferes with the primary task. Here, the primary task was 
navigating with the display types, which is a spatial task. The NDRT is 
also a spatial task as the speakers were positioned in front and behind 
the mock-up. Therefore, the two tasks demand the driver on the same 
processing channel (Wickens, 2002). However, it should be noted that 
the navigation task is also a visual attention task, whereas the NDRT is 
auditory with speech response. The speech response makes this task 
more realistic because it is similar to talking to car passengers. 
This cognitive task was also aimed at raising the drivers’ mental load, 
because driving on a straight urban road without other traffic was very 
easy. This task was to be performed verbally, not manually, because the 
participants had to steer and press a button when identifying the target 
intersection (cf. Bauerfeind et al., 2019). 
2.4. Experimental design 
For the driving simulator study, the APA ethical standards were 
strictly followed. A within-subjects design was used with participants 
randomly assigned to start either with the AR display or the HUD 
(Fig. 2). The seven drives per display type differed regarding the correct 
destination in the ambiguous navigation situations and were ordered 
randomly. Each drive was about 1 min and 30 s. The independent var­
iable was the display type (AR display or HUD). 
Fig. 3 presents the dependent variables. One dependent variable was 
the driver’s response time in the NDRT. The endpoint for the analysis 
was the participant’s individual response point (cf. Bauerfeind et al., 
2019), which is the point when the participant identified the target 
intersection while driving with the AR display or the HUD by switching 
off the display. This was decided because it is assumed that the task 
demand will decrease after the response point again. Previous results 
showed that, when driving with the AR display, participants identified 
the target intersection on average 69.5 m (SD = 21.4 m) before 
(Bauerfeind et al., 2019). With the HUD, they needed to be closer to the 
target intersection (M = 39.9 m, SD = 13.2 m), which was a significant 
difference. Results concerning the response points are presented in 
Bauerfeind et al. (2019). On the basis of the response points the starting 
point for the analysis for the NDRT was set to 120 m before the target 
intersection to have a stretch for the analysis (Fig. 3). 
The second and third dependent variables were driving performance. 
The distance to target intersection at accelerator pedal release was 
analysed. The accelerator pedal release is seen as the first action for the 
upcoming stop. 
Furthermore, the approach velocity to target intersection was 
Fig. 2. Experimental setup of the driving simulator study.  
K. Bauerfeind et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Applied Ergonomics 94 (2021) 103398
4
examined. The starting point for the analysis of the approach velocity 
was 120 m before the target intersection and the endpoint was the mean 
accelerator pedal release for AR averaged across all participants (second 
dependent variable, Fig. 3). With the HUD the pedal release happened 
later and therefore the mean with AR was chosen as a consistent 
endpoint. This pedal release led to a reduced velocity and therefore the 
velocity after this point did not count as approach velocity anymore. 
Finally, subjective ratings by the drivers were also analysed. Partic­
ipants rated the display types regarding reducing mental load in the 
navigation task (‘To what extent does the display reduce mental load in 
the navigation task?’). There were also subjective ratings concerning the 
difficulty and the effort of the driving task and the NDRT. Regarding the 
driving task, there were two items (difficulty of the driving task: ‘How 
difficult was the driving task in general?‘, effort for the driving task: 
‘How demanding was the driving task in general?‘). The driving task 
included the navigation task as well as the NDRT. Furthermore, partic­
ipants were asked two items regarding the NDRT (difficulty of the 
NDRT: ‘How difficult was the NDRT while driving?’ and effort for the 
NDRT: ‘How demanding was the NDRT while driving?‘). All closed 
questions were answered with a 15-point rating scale (Heller, 1982) 
(Fig. 4). 
2.5. Participants 
A total of 61 drivers participated in the study. Because of simulator 
sickness and lack of 3D-vision data of 59 participants could be analysed 
(n = 18 female). The participants averaged 37.1 years old (SD = 11.1 
years) and were recruited for the driving simulator study from the test 
driver pool of Volkswagen Group Innovation. On average they drove 
18274.7 km per year (SD = 11368.9 km). 44% of the participants stated 
they had experience with a HUD, but the majority of those stated that 
they rarely use it. 58% of the participants used vision correction by 
glasses or contact lenses. To get to know the display types and the 
simulator, participants started with a training. All participants received 
a present for their participation. 
2.6. Procedure 
After being welcomed, the participants completed the socio- 
demographic questions. Then, they were tested for stereo vision by 
applying the Butterfly Stereo Acuity Test (VAC Vision Assessment Cor­
poration, 2007) and for colour vision performance. The experimenter 
explained the primary task (the navigation task) as well as the NDRT 
(the auditory cognitive spatial task) to the participants. They received 
instructions regarding the buttons on the steering wheel for switching 
off the display. To experience the simulation in 3D, participants wore 
shutter glasses. They started with training the navigation task and NDRT 
without driving. Then, they practiced both tasks simultaneously until 
they could perform without errors. After the training session, the 
experiment started with seven drives, either with the AR display or the 
HUD. Participants were randomly assigned to one of the orders. If the 
participants identified the wrong intersection, they had to repeat the 
drive at the end of the respective display session. After finishing the 
display sessions, they rated the two display types using the evaluation 
Fig. 3. Example of a drive to the target intersection with the dependent variables. Dependent variables are indicated by bold face.  
Fig. 4. 15-point rating scale according to Heller (1982) with regard to the question: How difficult was the NDRT while driving? This scale was used for all 
closed questions. 
K. Bauerfeind et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Applied Ergonomics 94 (2021) 103398
5
questionnaire. After the experiment the participants received a present. 
The experiment lasted a total of 130 min. 
3. Results 
3.1. Data preparation 
In total, 59 participants were analysed. The NDRT was used to 
measure the drivers’ mental load. Because of technical issues, 697 trials 
could be observed in this analysis. To prepare the NDRT data, speech 
recognising software was written in R to extract the response time. For 
the analysis, the response time is the time stamp when participants 
started answering. A hierarchical linear model with maximal random 
effects structure and models with reduced random effects structures 
(Barr et al., 2013) were fitted and AIC-values were compared. The 
model, which scored the lowest on AIC-values explained the data best 
and was therefore chosen for the analysis. Resulting a hierarchical linear 
model with varying intercept and varying slope was analysed (N = 59). 
The dependent variable was mean response time in seconds. The inde­
pendent variables were display type (AR display, HUD) and remaining 
distance to the target intersection in meters. Participants were analysed 
as a random intercept. 
With regard to the driving data, a t-test for dependent samples was 
used to analyse the distance to the target intersection at accelerator 
pedal release (N = 59). To analyse the approach velocity to the target 
intersection, a hierarchical linear model with varying intercept and 
varying slope was modelled (N = 59). The dependent variable was mean 
velocity to the target intersection in kilometers per hour. Participants 
were analysed as a random intercept. 
Subjective data of 59 participants were analysed using repeated 
measures Analysis of Variance (rmANOVA) to examine the effects of 
display type (HUD vs. AR display) and the order of the display type as 
between subject factor. 
3.2. Non-driving-related task (NDRT) 
Fig. 5 shows line graphs of all predicted response times for the NDRT 
of the participants while navigating to the target intersection with the 
AR Display (Fig. 5, left) and the HUD (Fig. 5, right). Each line presents all 
drives per display type for the respective participant. The black lines 
present the predicted mean response times for the respective display 
type. The NDRT response time increased with distance to target for the 
HUD, but not for the AR display. Fig. 5 and Table 1 show the closer 
participants got to the target intersection with the HUD, the slower they 
responded to the NDRT (t = 4.19, p < .001). 
The hierarchical linear model predicts a significant difference in 
response times between the AR display and the HUD when reaching the 
target intersection (distance to target intersection = 0 m, Table 1). With 
the AR display, participants will answer on average after 1.35 s the 
moment they reach the target intersection, whereas with the HUD the 
value is 1.66 s (t = 4.11, p < .001). This is 0.31 s longer (Table 1). 
3.3. Driving data 
Regarding the driving data, there was a significant difference be­
tween the two display types in regard of the distance to the target 
intersection at accelerator pedal release (Fig. 6). With the AR display, 
participants released the accelerator pedal 70.2 m (SD = 15.6 m) on 
average before the intersection, whereas with the HUD the value was 
59.3 m (SD = 10.3 m), (t(58) = 6.37, p < .001, r = .64) (Fig. 6). 
Fig. 7 shows the approach velocity to the target intersection with the 
AR display and the HUD. The participants had a steady approach ve­
locity with both display types. With regard to the difference in approach 
velocity between the display types, participants drove significantly 
slower with the HUD (Fig. 7, Table 2). At 120 m before the target 
intersection participants drove 52.26 km/h with the AR display, 
whereas with the HUD the velocity was 49.35 km/h (t = −70.23, p <
.001; Table 2). Thus, 2.91 km/h slower (Table 2). 
Furthermore, the hierarchical linear model shows a significant dif­
ference in acceleration behaviour (t = 8.14, p < .001). However, this 
difference is so small that it does not show a practical relevance. 
3.4. Subjective evaluation 
The subjective evaluation of reduced mental load in the ambiguous 
navigation task showed a significant main effect between the display 
types (F(1, 57) = 130.39, p < .001, η2
p = .70). Participants rated that the 
AR display reduced more mental load in the navigation task than the 
HUD (AR display: M = 11.2, SD = 2.2; HUD: M = 7.3, SD = 2.4) (Fig. 8). 
The interaction between display type and order of display type was not 
significant (F(1, 57) = 1.33, p > .10, η2
p = .02) (cf. Bauerfeind et al., 
2019). 
According to Fig. 9 (a+b), participants rated the difficulty and the 
effort regarding the driving task significantly higher when driving with 
the HUD than with the AR display. Here, the driving task included both 
the navigation task and the NDRT. There was a significant main effect 
between the displays in regard to the difficulty of the driving task (F(1, 
57) = 47.42, p < .001, η2
p = .45). Thus, participants rated the driving task 
as less difficult when driving with the AR display than with the HUD (AR 
display: M = 7.3, SD = 2.3; HUD: M = 9.3, SD = 2.2) (Fig. 9a). The 
interaction between display type and order of display type was not 
significant (F(1, 57) = 2.05, p > .10, η2
p = .04). 
There was also a significant main effect concerning the effort of the 
driving task (F(1, 57) = 70.27, p < .001, η2
p = .55). While driving with 
the AR display, participants evaluated the driving task as less 
Fig. 5. Line graphs of all predicted response 
times in the NDRT in seconds (N = 59) 
driving with the AR display (left) and the 
HUD (right) to the target intersection (0 m). 
Each line presents all drives per display type 
for the respective participant. Starting point 
for the analysis was 120 m before the target 
intersection. Ending point for the analysis 
was the individual response point when the 
participant identified the target intersection, 
which is why lines differ in length. The black 
lines show the respective predicted mean 
response times.   
K. Bauerfeind et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Applied Ergonomics 94 (2021) 103398
6
demanding in comparison to the HUD (AR display: M = 7.2, SD = 2.1; 
HUD: M = 9.4, SD = 2.1) (Fig. 9b). A hybrid interaction effect between 
display type and order of display type points out that the main effect 
concerning the display type is globally interpretable (F(1, 57) = 9.08, p 
< .05, η2
p = .14). 
Regarding the NDRT, participants rated the difficulty and the effort 
of the NDRT significantly higher when driving with the HUD 
(Fig. 9c+d). Concerning the difficulty of the NDRT, there was a 
significant main effect (F(1, 57) = 14.52, p < .001, η2
p = .20). Partici­
pants rated the NDRT with both display types as “moderate difficult” but 
less difficult with the AR display (AR display: M = 7.6, SD = 2.5; HUD: 
M = 8.8, SD = 2.7) (Fig. 9c). A hybrid interaction effect between display 
type and order of display type points out that the main effect concerning 
the display type is globally interpretable (F(1, 57) = 4.39, p < .05, η2
p =
.07). 
There was also a significant main effect concerning the effort of the 
NDRT between the two display types (F(1, 57) = 29.75, p < .001, η2
p =
.34). Driving with the AR display, participants rated the NDRT less 
demanding than with the HUD (AR display: M = 7.8, SD = 2.6; HUD: M 
= 9.3, SD = 2.6) (Fig. 9d). A hybrid interaction effect between display 
type and order of display type points out that the main effect concerning 
the display type is globally interpretable (F(1, 57) = 10.49, p < .05, η2
p =
.16). 
4. Discussion 
The aim of the driving simulator study was to examine differences in 
drivers’ mental load in a navigating task using an AR display or a HUD. 
The study presented here confirms that AR information is more easily 
and quickly understood by the driver than a HUD. Results showed that 
AR information led to more confident driving behaviour than with the 
HUD. Furthermore, data revealed that AR information requires less of 
the drivers’ mental load in understanding and interpreting compared 
with HUDs. This was shown with objective performance measures in a 
NDRT and subjective ratings. It seems that the proximity of virtual and 
Table 1 
Hierarchical linear model analysis with predicted mean response times as the dependent variable and participant as a random intercept. The predicted mean response 
times refer to the moment reaching the target intersection.  
Measures 
Estimate 
SE 
t 
p 
95% CI  
Estimate 
SD 
(constant) 
[s]    
low 
high    
Fixed effects       
Random effects   
(Intercept)* 
1.35 
0.07 
18.59 
<.001 
1.21 
1.50 
(Intercept) 
0.07 
0.26 
HUD 
0.31 
0.08 
4.11 
< .001 
0.16 
0.46    
Distance to target intersection [m] 
0.0009 
0.0008 
1.14 
>.10 
−0.0006 
0.002 
Distance to target intersection 
0.000006 
0.003 
HUD * Distance to target inter-section [m] 
0.004 
0.0008 
4.19 
< .001 
0.002 
0.005 
Residuals 
0.13 
0.36 
Note. *predicted response time with the AR display at the target intersection (0 m). SE = standard error. SD = standard deviation. R2marginal = 0.05, R2conditional =
0.19. Significant effects are indicated by bold face, N = 59. 
Fig. 6. Boxplots of the distance to target intersection at accelerator pedal 
release of all participants regarding the two display types (N = 59). 
Fig. 7. Graph of approach velocity of all participants (N = 59) with the two display types, HUD and AR display, starting from 120 m before the target intersection to 
the moment of mean accelerator pedal release with AR (70.2m before the target intersection, marked by the left vertical line. Mean accelerator pedal release with 
HUD was at 59.3m before the target intersection, marked by the right vertical line). 
K. Bauerfeind et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Applied Ergonomics 94 (2021) 103398
7
real objects results in the driver not having to switch between the 
relevant navigation information and the real traffic situation, which is in 
line with assertions in the literature (Kim and Dey, 2009). As a result, AR 
information leads to reduced mental load. 
Results of the study showed that participants responded to the NDRT 
faster while driving with the AR display compared with the HUD. 
Furthermore, participants had an almost constant response time with 
the AR display while approaching the ambiguous target intersection. 
The closer the participants with the HUD drove to the target intersec­
tion, the response times increased constantly. It seems that the closer 
they got, the more they concentrated on the HUD to solve the ambiguous 
navigation task, which therefore interfered with the NDRT. This per­
formance loss in the NDRT indicates a raised driver’s mental load 
through the HUD compared with the AR display. Overall, navigating 
with the AR display is less demanding than with the HUD and fewer 
resources appear necessary. Any difference between the two display 
types could have produced this result, but it is assumed that it was 
caused by the superimposition of AR information on the respective real 
object, resulting in an intuitive and fast understanding being possible for 
the driver. Especially in navigation, following AR information demands 
less mental load than a HUD. Because of the superimposition of AR in­
formation, the driver does not have to map the AR information onto the 
environment. Resulting the assertion in the literature can be confirmed 
(Pfannmüller, 2017). 
The subjective data confirmed the reduced mental load while driving 
with AR. The participants rated that the AR display reduced more 
mental load in the navigation task than the HUD. They stated that the 
NDRT was more difficult and more demanding when driving with the 
HUD. Therefore, in line with previous assertions (Bengler et al., 2015; 
Israel, 2012; Kim and Dey, 2009; Pfannmüller, 2017; Pfannmüller et al., 
2015), mental effort appears to be reduced with AR information relative 
to the HUD. Furthermore, the drivers rated the driving task including the 
navigation task and the NDRT as less demanding and less difficult with 
AR than with the HUD. This confirms that, compared with the HUD, 
navigating, and passing the NDRT is easier with AR. 
Regarding the driving data, results showed that participants took 
their foot off the accelerator pedal significantly earlier with AR than 
with a HUD. Taking the foot off is the first action for the upcoming stop. 
With the AR display, participants identified the target intersection 
earlier (cf. Bauerfeind et al., 2019) and thus showed a first action for the 
upcoming stop earlier than with the HUD. Also, participants had to stop 
acceleration earlier to be able to stop at the target intersection because 
the analysis of the approach velocity showed they drove faster with AR 
than with the HUD. The difference in velocity between the two display 
types was only 3 km/h, but very consistent. Participants intuitively 
followed the AR arrow lying on the street, which might have led to more 
confident driving behaviour than with the HUD. With the HUD, they had 
to map the information to the real world to identify the correct target 
intersection. A reduced velocity might therefore show compensating 
behaviour. This compensating behaviour is described in the 
speed-accuracy tradeoff (cf. Garrett, 1922; Heitz, 2014; Woodworth, 
1899). Accordingly, it takes longer to accomplish a task more accu­
rately, but saving time results in reduced accuracy. Driving slower might 
have allowed more time to choose the target intersection with the HUD. 
Regarding the limitations of the study, it has to be noted that the 
information in the two displays were not informationally equivalent at 
any time. At the beginning of each drive, the HUD presented the infor­
mation to go straight. The turning direction could be presented when 
there were fewer than three intersections to come. In contrast, the driver 
could see from far away whether it was a left or a right turn because of 
the superimposition of AR information on the real street. Therefore, this 
might be an advantage of AR information. 
Concerning the analysis of the NDRT, it has to be considered that it is 
based on the range from 120 m before the target intersection to the 
individual response point. Thus, the intercept, which refers to the 
moment the participants reached the target intersection, is an estimate. 
However, with this hierarchical linear model, the rise in response times 
approaching the target intersection could be modelled, which makes the 
model very suitable for the analysis. 
Furthermore, the endpoint for the analysis of approach velocity was 
the mean accelerator pedal release with the AR display. Lifting the foot 
off the accelerator pedal was seen as the first action for the upcoming 
stop. Therefore, the velocity after this point did not count as approach 
velocity anymore. However, a few participants lifted their foot off the 
accelerator pedal earlier than this mean, therefore already reducing 
speed. Yet the velocity with the AR display was still higher than with the 
HUD. This means that the counterargument even strengthens the dif­
ference in velocity between the two display types. 
Overall, deviations with respect to handling the driving simulator 
have to be considered. The velocity is often underestimated in a simu­
lator. Deviations between the expected and the driven velocity can result 
in enhanced braking and acceleration. 
In the study presented here, in order to achieve a high standardiza­
tion for the ambiguous navigation situations, there was no other traffic 
in the streets. Thus, a systematic evaluation of subjective and objective 
data could be made. Because the AR information seemed to be placed 
onto the driving situation, the interrelatedness between this information 
and other traffic has to be tested. For further research on AR, it is 
necessary to evaluate these findings in a real driving environment. In 
particular, effects of traffic density on the interaction with AR infor­
mation have to be examined. Putting information in the forward field of 
view could occlude information that might be important for driving (e. 
g., a pedestrian, a bicyclist). 
Table 2 
Hierarchical linear model analysis with mean velocity as the dependent variable 
from 120 m to 70.2 m before the target intersection.  
Measures 
Estimate 
SE 
t 
p 
95% CI 
(constant) 
[km/h]    
low 
high 
Fixed effects       
(Intercept)* 
52.26 
0.54 
94.41 
<.001 
51.18 
53.35 
HUD 
¡2.91 
0.04 
¡70.23 
< 
.001 
¡2.99 
¡2.83 
Distance to target 
intersection 
[m] 
¡0.05 
0.00 
¡47.37 
< 
.001 
¡0.05 
¡0.05 
HUD * Distance to 
target 
intersection 
[m] 
0.01 
0.00 
8.14 
< 
.001 
0.01 
0.01 
Note. *velocity with AR display at −120 m before the target intersection. SE =
standard error. SD random effects = 4.25 m. R2marginal = 0.06, R2conditional 
= 0.55. Significant effects are indicated by bold face, N = 59. 
Fig. 8. Bar graphs of subjective evaluation regarding reduced mental load in 
the navigation task (N = 59), (1: low reduction, 15: high reduction). 
K. Bauerfeind et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Applied Ergonomics 94 (2021) 103398
8
5. Conclusion 
This research was focused on the effects of AR information on 
drivers’ mental load in a navigation task. Overall, this study confirms 
that AR information is more easily and quickly understood by the driver 
than a HUD. Moreover, data showed that AR information led to more 
confident driving behaviour than with the HUD. Furthermore, fewer 
resources appear necessary while navigating with AR information. The 
reduced mental load level might result in safer driving with less inat­
tention because the driver is able to spend the necessary resources on the 
driving task itself. In this study, stereo simulation was used so partici­
pants could experience the simulated world and the navigation infor­
mation in 3D. Thus, participants got a more realistic impression of AR 
depth cues for navigation. In this study, AR information was perfectly 
implemented in the driving scenarios. Further research should evaluate 
whether deviations in positioning might incur costs resulting in a higher 
mental load level in return. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgements 
We express our sincere thanks to Michael Wittk¨amper for imple­
menting the AR display in the simulated world, to Lea Dingler for her 
support to collect the data and to Anne-Marie Wesseling for her support 
in data preparation. Gratefully acknowledged is Professor Stephen 
Arnott, who provided feedback on the manuscript. 
References 
Barr, D.J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., Tily, H.J., 2013. Random effects structure for 
confirmatory hypothesis testing: keep it maximal. J. Mem. Lang. 68 (3), 255–278. 
Bauerfeind, K., Drüke, J., Bendewald, L., Baumann, M., 2019. When does the driver 
benefit from AR information in a navigation task compared to a Head-Up Display? 
Results of a driving simulator study. ISSN 2333-4959. In: de Waard, D., 
Brookhuis, K., Coelho, D., Fairclough, S., Manzey, D., Naumann, A., Onnasch, L., 
R¨ottger, S., Toffetti, A., Wiczorek, R. (Eds.), 2019). Proceedings of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society Europe Chapter 2018 Annual Conference, 
pp. 219–230. Download from. http://hfes-europe.org. 
Bengler, K., G¨otze, M., Pfannmüller, L., Zaindl, A., 2015. To see or not to see - innovative 
display technologies as enablers for ergonomic cockpit concepts. Ergonomic 
requirements, future mobility, future functionality. In: Proceedings of the Electronic 
Displays Conference. 
Garrett, H.E., 1922. A Study of the Relation of Accuracy to Speed, vol. 8. Columbia 
university. 
Heitz, R.P., 2014. The speed-accuracy tradeoff: history, physiology, methodology, and 
behavior. Front. Neurosci. 8, 150. 
Heller, O., 1982. Theorie und Praxis des Verfahrens der Kategorieunterteilung (KU). In: 
Heller, O. (Ed.), Forschungsbericht 1981. Department of Psychology, Wuerzburg, 
Germany, pp. 1–15. 
Hexagon, A.B., 2021. Virtual Test Drive, vollst¨andige Prozesskette für die 
Fahrsimulation. Retrieved from. https://www.mscsoftware.com/de/virtual-test 
-drive. 
Israel, B., 2012. Potenziale eines kontaktanalogen Head-up Displays für den 
Serieneinsatz (Doctoral dissertation). Technical University of Munich. 
Jahn, G., Oehme, A., Krems, J.F., Gelau, C., 2005. Peripheral detection as a workload 
measure in driving: effects of traffic complexity and route guidance system use in a 
driving study. Transport. Res. F Traffic Psychol. Behav. 8 (3), 255–275. 
Kim, S., Dey, A.K., 2009. Simulated Augmented Reality Windshield Display as a 
Cognitive Mapping Aid for Elder Driver Navigation. Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, NY, 
pp. 133–142. https://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518724. 
Fig. 9. Bar graphs of subjective evaluation regarding difficulty and effort of the driving task (navigation task & NDRT) and the NDRT (N = 59), (1: low consent, 15: 
high consent on the specific item). 
K. Bauerfeind et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             


Applied Ergonomics 94 (2021) 103398
9
Medenica, Z., Kun, A.L., Paek, T., Palinko, O., 2011. Augmented reality vs. street views: a 
driving simulator study comparing two emerging navigation aids. In: Proceedings of 
the 13th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile 
Devices and Services. ACM, pp. 265–274. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
2037373.2037414. 
Pfannmüller, L., 2017. Anzeigekonzepte für ein kontaktanloges Head-up Display 
(Doctoral dissertation). Technical University of Munich. 
Pfannmüller, L., Kramer, M., Senner, B., Bengler, K., 2015. A comparison of display 
concepts for a navigation system in an automotive contact analog Head-up Display. 
Procedia Manufac. 3, 2722–2729. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.678. 
Prinzel, L.J., Risser, M., 2004. Head-Up Displays And Attention Capture (Report NASA/TM- 
2004-21300). National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Langley Research 
Center, Hampton, Virginia.  
Rasmussen, J., 1983. Skills, rules, and knowledge; signals, signs, and symbols, and other 
distinctions in human performance models. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybernet. SMC- 13 
(3), 257–266. 
VAC Vision Assessment Corporation, 2007. The butterfly stereo acuity test with lea 
Symbols®. Retrieved from. https://www.ophthalmicdata.com/wp-content/uploa 
ds/2015/03/StereoButterflyManual.pdf. 
Wickens, C.D., 2002. Multiple resources and performance prediction. Theor. Issues 
Ergon. Sci. 3 (2), 159–177. 
Woodworth, R.S., 1899. Accuracy of voluntary movement. Psychol. Rev.: Monograph 
Supplements 3 (3), i. 
K. Bauerfeind et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                             


