Attentional Capture by Salient Distractors during Visual
Search Is Determined by Temporal Task Demands
Monika Kiss1, Anna Grubert1,2, Anders Petersen3, and Martin Eimer1
Abstract
■The question whether attentional capture by salient but task-
irrelevant visual stimuli is triggered in a bottom–up fashion or
depends on top–down task settings is still unresolved. Strong sup-
port for bottom–up capture was obtained in the additional single-
ton task, in which search arrays were visible until response onset.
Equally strong evidence for top–down control of attentional cap-
ture was obtained in spatial cueing experiments in which display
durations were very brief. To demonstrate the critical role of tem-
poral task demands on salience-driven attentional capture, we
measured ERP indicators of capture by task-irrelevant color single-
tons in search arrays that could also contain a shape target. In
Experiment 1, all displays were visible until response onset. In
Experiment 2, display duration was limited to 200 msec. With long
display durations, color singleton distractors elicited an N2pc com-
ponent that was followed by a late Pd component, suggesting that
they triggered attentional capture, which was later replaced by
location-specific inhibition. When search arrays were visible for
only 200 msec, the distractor-elicited N2pc was eliminated and
was replaced by a Pd component in the same time range, indica-
tive of rapid suppression of capture. Results show that attentional
capture by salient distractors can be inhibited for short-duration
search displays, in which it would interfere with target processing.
They demonstrate that salience-driven capture is not a purely
bottom–up phenomenon but is subject to top–down control. ■
INTRODUCTION
A salient visual stimulus such as a unique red item pre-
sented among numerous blue items (a feature singleton)
often elicits rapid shifts of spatial attention. One of the
most enduring controversies in attention research relates
to the question whether such shifts can be triggered in a
purely bottom–up (stimulus-driven) fashion or whether
they are always mediated by top–down (goal-directed)
control settings. According to the bottom–up view, the
initial allocation of attention is determined solely by phys-
ical stimulus properties: Attention is rapidly and auto-
matically attracted by the largest local feature contrast
in a visual array, regardless of current top–down task sets
(Theeuwes, 2010). The most compelling evidence for
bottom–up attentional capture comes from the addi-
tional singleton paradigm developed by Theeuwes
(1991, 1992). When observers search for a shape single-
ton target presented among nontarget shapes (e.g., a dia-
mond among circle distractors), RTs are delayed on trials
in which a salient but task-irrelevant color singleton is si-
multaneously present in the visual search array, relative
to trials without a color distractor. This distractor inter-
ference effect has been attributed to salience-driven
bottom–up attentional capture by color singletons that
is triggered in spite of the fact that color is completely task
irrelevant.
The bottom–up account of attentional capture has not
remained unchallenged. In a series of studies by Folk and
colleagues (Folk & Remington, 1998; Folk, Remington, &
Wright, 1994; Folk, Remington, & Johnston, 1992), spatial
cueing procedures were employed to demonstrate that
singleton capture is determined by current top–down task
sets. On each trial, spatially nonpredictive singleton cues
preceded visual search displays, and attentional capture
by singleton cues was inferred from the presence of spatial
cueing effects (i.e., faster RTs in response to visual search
targets at cued relative to uncued locations). Such spatial
cueing effects were found only when cues matched the
current task set (e.g., for color singleton cues in blocks in
which targets were also color singletons) but not for cues
with task-irrelevant features. This pattern of results gave
rise to the contingent involuntary orienting hypothesis
(Folk et al., 1992), which postulates that attentional capture
is not an inevitable consequence of bottom–up salience
but will only be elicited by salient visual stimuli that match
currently task-relevant attributes.
The roles of bottom–up and top–down factors in atten-
tional capture are still debated. In support of the bottom–
up view, Theeuwes (2010) argued that the presence of
spatial cueing effects for task-set-matching cues and their
absence for nonmatching cues, as observed by Folk and
colleagues, does not provide unequivocal evidence for
task set contingent attentional capture. His claim is that
singleton cues will always trigger attention shifts, indepen-
dently of current task sets, but that attention is then rapidly
disengaged from stimuli that have no task-set-relevant
1Birkbeck College London, 2Université de Fribourg, 3University
of Copenhagen
© 2012 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 24:3, pp. 749–759


attributes. Because rapid bottom–up attentional capture is
immediately followed by rapid disengagement from non-
matching cues before the presentation of subsequent tar-
gets, no behavioral spatial cueing effects will be triggered
by such cues (see also Theeuwes, Atchley, & Kramer, 2000).
In support of the top–down view, Folk and Remington
(1998) have argued that the RT costs associated with the
presence of a salient but irrelevant distractor in the addi-
tional singleton paradigm does not provide incontro-
vertible evidence for bottom–up capture. They claim that
these costs arise as a result of the visual complexity of
search arrays that contain two singleton stimuli. This ex-
tends the duration of preattentive processing (preattentive
filtering costs; see also Kahneman, Treisman, & Burkell,
1983) and delays shifts of attention to target stimuli, result-
ing in delayed responses on distractor-present trials that
are not the result of salience-driven attentional capture
by distractors.
It will be obvious that these arguments depend on very
specific assumptions about the time course of attentional
capture and attentional target selection, which are diffi-
cult to test on the basis of behavioral measures alone.
For this reason, brain ERP markers of selective attentional
processing now play an increasingly important role in
current debates about the top–down versus bottom–up
control of attentional capture. In several recent studies,
the N2pc component has been employed as a temporally
precise measure of attentional capture by salient stimuli in
visual search arrays (e.g., Eimer, Kiss, Press, & Sauter, 2009;
Eimer & Kiss, 2008; Lien, Ruthruff, Goodin, & Remington,
2008; Hickey, McDonald, & Theeuwes, 2006). The N2pc is
an enhanced negativity that is observed over posterior
scalp electrodes contralateral to the side of an attended
stimulus, is typically elicited between 200 and 300 msec
after the onset of a visual search array, and is assumed to
reflect the attentional selection of potentially relevant items
among distractors in visual search tasks (Eimer, 1996; Luck
& Hillyard, 1994). Eimer and Kiss (2008) measured the
N2pc to spatially uninformative color singleton cues that
preceded target search arrays. When observers had to re-
port the orientation of a uniquely colored red target bar
among gray distractor bars, behavioral spatial cueing effects
indicative of attentional capture and an N2pc to red single-
ton cues were observed. In contrast, no behavioral cueing
effects and no N2pc emerged in response to the same cues
when observers had to detect a smaller target bar among
larger distractor bars. The observation that an N2pc was
elicited by perceptually salient color singleton cues only
when color was task relevant supports the contingent invol-
untary attentional capture hypothesis by Folk et al. (1992)
but is not in line with the view that capture is primarily driven
by bottom–up salience (see also Eimer et al., 2009; Lien
et al., 2008, for similar N2pc results in spatial cueing experi-
ments). The absence of any early-onset N2pc components
to color singleton cues that did not match the current top–
down task set also casts doubt on the hypothesis that these
cues trigger rapid salience-driven attentional capture,
which is later followed by rapid disengagement (Theeuwes,
2010; see also Ansorge, Kiss, Worschech, & Eimer, 2011,
for further ERP evidence against this rapid disengagement
account).
Although these ERP experiments provide no support
for the existence of bottom–up attentional capture that is
triggered independently of top–down task sets, it is notable
that all employed variants of the spatial cueing paradigm
introduced by Folk et al. (1992). In fact, very different find-
ings were obtained in an ERP study that measured N2pc
components in the additional singleton paradigm (Hickey
et al., 2006). In this experiment, in which shape singletons
served as targets and could be accompanied by salient but
task-irrelevant color singleton distractors, RTs were de-
layed in distractor-present relative to distractor-absent
trials. Most importantly, a reliable N2pc component was
triggered by color singleton distractors on trials in which
the target was on the vertical meridian (and therefore did
not elicit lateralized selection-related ERP components),
suggesting that these distractors did indeed capture atten-
tion in spite of the fact that they were known to be task
irrelevant. Moreover, on trials in which targets and distrac-
tors were located in opposite hemifields, a small distractor
N2pc preceded the target N2pc, suggesting that attention
was initially drawn to the distractor before it was reallo-
cated to the target. These results appear to provide strong
support for the bottom–up nature of attentional capture by
salient visual events and against the hypothesis that atten-
tional capture is always under top–down control.
To summarize, recent ERP studies of attentional cap-
ture have, so far, failed to resolve the impasse between
top–down and bottom–up accounts of attentional cap-
ture. Whereas N2pc results from spatial cueing experi-
ments support the contingent involuntary attention
hypothesis by Folk et al. (1992), N2pc evidence from
the additional singleton paradigm points to an important
and independent role for bottom–up salience in atten-
tional capture. This is clearly a very unsatisfactory state
of affairs, which hampers progress in this area. To rectify
this situation, the factors that are responsible for the dis-
crepant findings in spatial cueing and additional singleton
studies need to be identified. One potentially critical and
hitherto overlooked difference between these two experi-
mental procedures concerns the specific time demands
that are imposed on attentional selectivity. In experiments
that employ the additional singleton paradigm, search dis-
plays typically remain visible until a response has been
executed. As a consequence, participants have sufficient
time to detect, select, and identify a target stimulus even
when attention is initially drawn to a task-irrelevant but
salient distractor. In contrast, cue and search arrays in
spatial cueing experiments are presented very briefly
and in rapid succession (with typical stimulus durations
varying between 50 and 200 msec). This imposes much
stricter temporal demands on attentional target selection,
as the time window for detecting, selecting, and identify-
ing a target is very narrow, and attentional capture by a
750
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Volume 24, Number 3


distractor will almost certainly result in the target stimulus
being missed. In short, the allocation of attention to a task-
irrelevant but salient stimulus will compromise successful
target detection under conditions of high time pressure
(short stimulus durations) but much less in tasks in which
time pressure is low (long stimulus durations). In the for-
mer, but not in the latter case, efficient task performance
may require the additional activation of mechanisms that
prevent capture by salient distractors. The presence of
salience-driven attentional capture effects in experiments
with long search display durations (additional singleton
task) and the presence of task-set-contingent attentional
capture in experiments in which search display durations
are short (spatial cueing task) may be the consequence
of such differences in the time demands on attentional
selectivity in these two experimental paradigms.
The aim of the present ERP study was to investigate the
hypothesis that the presence versus absence of salience-
driven attentional capture depends on the temporal de-
mands of an attentional selection task. To test this, we
employed the additional singleton paradigm. Experimental
procedures were very similar to the previous ERP study
by Hickey et al. (2006), which obtained N2pc evidence
for attentional capture by salient but irrelevant distractors.
Participants searched for a shape singleton target (a circle
among diamonds or vice versa in randomly intermixed
trials) and responded according to the orientation of the
line within the target shape. Targets appeared with equal
probability at any of the six array positions (see Figure 1).
Twenty-five percent of all arrays did not contain a shape
target singleton. The presence or absence of an additional
task-irrelevant color singleton was blocked (as in Pinto,
Olivers, & Theeuwes, 2005; Theeuwes, 1991, 1992). In
one third of all blocks, no color singletons were presented.
In the remaining blocks, each search array contained one
color singleton (randomly red or green), which appeared
on the left or right side. Two experiments were conducted
that were identical in all respects except for the duration of
each search display. In Experiment 1, search arrays re-
mained visible until a response was registered (as in Hickey
et al., 2006). In Experiment 2, search display duration was
limited to 200 msec. Target shape and distractor color
always varied unpredictably across trials, as distractor-
induced RT costs indicative of attentional capture are
much larger under these conditions than in tasks in which
target and/or distractor features are constant and, there-
fore, predictable (e.g., Becker, 2007; Pinto et al., 2005).
If attentional capture by salient but irrelevant color
singletons is critically dependent on the temporal demands
imposed on attentional selectivity, ERP evidence for
salience-driven attentional capture should be observed in
Experiment 1, but not in Experiment 2. When search arrays
remained visible until response onset, color singleton dis-
tractors were expected to trigger an N2pc component in-
dicative of attentional capture, in line with the results of
Hickey et al. (2006). However, and critically, when display
duration was limited to 200 msec, the prediction was that
salience-driven attentional capture would be prevented by
top–down control because of its potentially disastrous con-
sequences for target detection and task performance. If
this was the case, no N2pc should be triggered by color
singletons in Experiment 2. Instead, lateralized posterior
ERPs might provide evidence for the active inhibition of
attention shifts to distractor singletons.
Top–down inhibition of attentional capture has recently
been associated with a lateralized posterior ERP compo-
nent that resembles the N2pc in terms of its latency and
topography but shows an inverse polarity. This contra-
lateral positivity (termed Pd component) was elicited by
laterally presented color distractors when observers dis-
criminated the shape of a luminance target on the vertical
meridian (Hickey, Di Lollo, & McDonald, 2009) and was
Figure 1. Examples of search
displays for the five trial types
used in the N2pc analyses in
both experiments. The color
singleton distractor was either
red or green (depicted here
in black).
Kiss et al.
751


interpreted as reflecting the active inhibition of these dis-
tractors. The Pd was eliminated when observers were only
required to detect the presence of a target, suggesting that
distractors are suppressed only when attentional task de-
mands are high. Sawaki and Luck (2010) reported Pd com-
ponents to salient color distractors when observers
searched for nonsalient target letters and proposed that
salient singletons produce an automatic “attend-to-me
signal” that can be overridden by active top–down sup-
pression to avoid attentional capture by these stimuli. A
Pd component has also been observed in the spatial cueing
task in response to color singleton cues when participants
searched for size-defined targets, and color was, therefore,
task irrelevant (Eimer & Kiss, 2008). If attentional capture
by irrelevant color distractors in the additional singleton
task can be prevented by active inhibition when this is re-
quired by the temporal demands of an attentional selection
task, a Pd component should be found for these stimuli in
Experiment 2, in which search displays were presented for
only 200 msec.
To test these hypotheses, lateralized posterior ERP
components were measured in Experiments 1 and 2 for
five different types of search arrays (see Figure 1). ERP
components elicited in response to lateral shape target
singletons were computed separately for arrays without
an additional color distractor, and for arrays in which a
color distractor was located on the same side as the target,
or on the opposite side, respectively. For these arrays,
strong target N2pc components should be found, but
these were expected to be modulated by the presence of
distractor-elicited N2pc or Pd components in Experiments 1
and 2. ERP components to lateral distractors were com-
puted separately for target-absent displays, and for search
arrays, in which targets appeared on the vertical midline
and, therefore, did not trigger a lateralized N2pc compo-
nent. The critical question was whether these distractors
would elicit an N2pc component indicative of attentional
capture in Experiment 1, and a Pd component indicative
of suppressed capture in Experiment 2.
METHODS
Participants
Seventeen paid volunteers were recruited to participate
in Experiment 1, and 16 new volunteers were recruited
for Experiment 2. Informed consent was obtained from
all participants before testing. Four participants of Ex-
periment 1 and three of Experiment 2 were excluded
from analyses because of excessive eye movements
(see Methods section). One additional participant was ex-
cluded from each experiment because of excessive alpha
activity. The remaining 12 participants in Experiment 1
(four men) had a mean age of 25.7 years. The 12 par-
ticipants in Experiment 2 (four men) had a mean age of
29.1 years. All were right-handed and had normal or cor-
rected vision.
Stimuli and Procedure
Stimulus presentation and response collection were con-
trolled using E-Prime software (Psychology Software Tools,
Inc., Sharpsburg, PA). Stimuli were presented on a CRT
monitor with a 100-Hz refresh rate. Each search array con-
sisted of six outline shapes placed at regular intervals
around a central fixation cross at a radial distance of 4.0°.
One of these shapes was a singleton item (a circle among
diamonds or a diamond among circles; see Figure 1). Each
outline shape subtended 1.1° × 1.1° and enclosed a line
segment whose orientation (horizontal or vertical) was ran-
domly assigned. All items in the display were light gray
(Commision Internationale de lʼEclairage [CIE] chromatic-
ity coordinates, 0.287/0.314) except for the irrelevant color
singleton, which (when present) was either red (CIE,
0.619/0.339) or green (CIE, 0.296/0.567). All colors were
equiluminant (10.3 cd/m2), and all stimuli were presented
against a black background. In Experiment 1, search arrays
remained present until a response was registered, up to a
maximum of 2500 msec. In Experiment 2, each search array
was presented for 200 msec and was followed by a fixation
cross display for 2300 msec. In all other respects, stimuli
and procedure were identical in both experiments.
Shape singletons (circles among diamonds or vice versa)
appeared randomly and equiprobably at one of the six
possible locations in 75% of all trials. In the remaining
25% of all trials, the shape of all display items was uniform.
Shape singletons served as targets, and participants were
instructed to report the orientation of the line (horizontal
or vertical) within the target shape by pressing one of two
vertically aligned buttons with their left or right index fin-
ger. Orientation-to-response-key mapping was counter-
balanced across participants. No response was required on
target-absent trials. In one third of all blocks, no color sin-
gletons were presented. In the other blocks, one color sin-
gleton (randomly red or green) was present in every trial
and appeared with equal probability at one of the four lat-
eral positions (with the exception that target singleton
shapes were never colored) but never at the top or bottom
position. A total of 30 blocks with 32 trials per block were
run. Two successive blocks with color singleton distractors
alternated with one block without these distractors. Six
participants started with two distractor-present blocks,
and the other six started with a distractor-absent block.
EEG Data Recording and Analysis
EEG was DC-recoded from 23 electrodes mounted in an
elastic cap at positions Fpz, Fz, F3, F4, F7, F8, FC5, FC6,
Cz, C3, C4, T7, T8, CP5, CP6, Pz, P3, P4, P7, P8, PO7, PO8,
and Oz. EEG data were sampled at 500 Hz, with a digital
low-pass filter of 40 Hz. All electrodes were referenced to
the left earlobe and off-line rereferenced to averaged ear-
lobes. The continuous EEG was segmented from 100 msec
before to 500 msec after search array onset. Incorrect trials
and trials containing saccades (horizontal EOG exceeding
752
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Volume 24, Number 3


±25 μV), blinks (Fpz exceeding ±60 μV), or muscle arti-
facts (all other electrodes exceeding ±80 μV) were re-
moved from further analyses. Three participants were
excluded because their residual horizontal EOG exceeded
±4 μV in at least one trial condition. Average waveforms
were computed separately for five different types of search
stimulus arrays: (1) lateral target, no distractor; (2) lateral
target, distractor same side; (3) lateral target, distractor op-
posite side; (4) lateral distractor, no target; and (5) lateral
distractor, midline target. Separate averages were com-
puted for trials in which targets appeared in the left or right
hemifield. For trials with lateral distractors and absent or
midline targets, separate averages were computed for left
and right distractors. To compute lateralized posterior ERP
components (N2pc, Pd), mean amplitude values were mea-
sured at lateral posterior electrodes PO7 and PO8. Separate
repeated measures ANOVAs were conducted to examine
N2pc/Pd components in response to lateral target stimuli
(with distractors either absent, on the same side, or on
the opposite side), and in response to lateral distractors
(with targets either absent or on the vertical midline). The
former analyses included the factor Distractor Type (absent
vs. same side vs. opposite sides), and the latter included
the factor Target Type (absent vs. midline). Both analyses
also included the factors Contralaterality (electrode contra-
lateral vs. ipsilateral to target/distractor location) and Target/
Distractor Side (left vs. right). Greenhouse–Geisser correc-
tions were used for main effects and interactions where
appropriate. Performance differences between conditions
were assessed with two-tailed t tests.
RESULTS
Experiment 1
Behavioral Results
Trials in which responses were faster than 200 msec or
slower than 2400 msec were excluded from analyses (less
than 0.1% of all trials). The presence of a color singleton
distractor delayed mean correct RTs to shape targets (993 vs.
912 msec; t(11) = 6.7, p < .001), and the size of this dis-
tractor interference effect on distractor-present trials was
modulated by the relative position of targets and dis-
tractors. RTs were delayed on trials in which targets and
distractors appeared in the same hemifield relative to trials
in which they were in opposite hemifields (1024 msec vs.
949 msec; t(11) = 7.8, p < .001). Mean RT for targets
on the vertical meridian in distractor-present blocks was
1005 msec, that is, intermediate between same-hemifield
and opposite-hemifield trials (both t(11) > 2.3, both ps <
.05). RT distractor interference effects were smallest on
trials in which targets and distractors appeared on opposite
sides but were still reliable relative to distractor-absent
blocks (t(11) = 2.6, p < .05). Error rates were higher in
blocks with color singleton distractors than in blocks in
which targets were presented without distractors (4.1%
vs. 2.9%; t(11) = 2.9, p < .05). False alarms occurred on
0.4% of all target-absent trials.
ERP Results
Figure 2 (top row) shows ERPs triggered at electrodes
PO7/PO8 by lateral shape targets for search arrays repre-
senting the three levels of the factor distractor type (arrays
without a color singleton distractor, arrays with a target and
distractor in the same hemifield, and arrays with a target
and distractor in opposite hemifields). Figure 2 (bottom
row) shows ERPs for trials with lateral color distractors,
which were either presented without target or with a shape
target on the vertical meridian (representing the two levels
of the factor target type in the analysis of distractor-elicited
ERPs). As expected, an N2pc was triggered by lateral shape
targets. Importantly, an N2pc of smaller amplitude and
reduced duration was also observed for lateral color single-
ton distractors, both on target-absent trials and on trials
with shape targets on the vertical meridian. This distractor
N2pc was followed by an enhanced positivity contralateral
to the distractor that started around 300 msec after search
array onset, indicative of the Pd component. During this
time interval, target N2pc amplitudes were strongly attenu-
ated on trials with same-side distractors relative to trials
with targets and distractors on opposite sides. To capture
this specific sequence of lateralized posterior ERP compo-
nents, mean amplitudes at PO7/PO8 were analyzed within
two successive time windows, one focused on the N2pc
component (220–300 msec after search array onset) and
the other one focused on the subsequent Pd component
(300–340 msec poststimulus).
Lateralized posterior ERP components triggered by target
stimuli.
In the 220–300 msec time window, a main effect
of Contralaterality was present, F(1, 11) = 30.8, p < .001,
reflecting the presence of target-elicited N2pc compo-
nents. There was no interaction between Contralaterality
and Distractor Type, F < 1.1, because of the fact that
N2pc amplitudes, triggered by targets during this time in-
terval, were similar regardless of whether distractor stim-
uli were absent, appeared on the same side, or appeared
on the opposite side. In the 300–340 msec time window,
a main effect of Contralaterality, F(1, 11) = 11.6, p < .01,
was accompanied by an interaction between Contralateral-
ity and Distractor, F(2, 22) = 7.1, p < .05. As can be seen in
Figure 2 (top row), the late phase of the target N2pc was
strongly attenuated on trials in which targets and distrac-
tors appeared on the same side relative to opposite side
and distractor-absent trials, F(1, 11) = 7.7 and 14.2, both
ps < .05. This was confirmed in follow-up analyses that re-
vealed the presence of reliable late target N2pc compo-
nents on distractor-absent trials, F(1, 11) = 10.0, p < .01,
and on trials in which distractors appeared in the opposite
hemifield, F(1, 11) = 22.8, p < .001, but not on trials in
which targets and distractors were located in the same
hemifield, F < 1.
Kiss et al.
753


Lateralized posterior ERP components triggered by
distractor stimuli.
A main effect of Contralaterality, F(1,
11) = 5.4, p < .05, was observed in the 220-300 msec
poststimulus time window, demonstrating that color sin-
gleton distractors triggered a reliable N2pc component.
There was no interaction between Contralaterality and
Target Presence, F < 1.1, suggesting that this distractor
N2pc was of similar size regardless of whether distractors
were the only singleton item in the search array or were
presented together with a shape singleton target on the
vertical meridian. In the subsequent 300–340 msec post-
stimulus time window, a reliable main effect of Contra-
laterality was present, F(1, 11) = 4.8, p < .05, now
reflecting a contralaterally enhanced positivity (Pd). There
was no interaction between Contralaterality and Target
Presence, F < 1, as distractor Pd amplitudes did not differ
between trials without targets and trials with targets on the
vertical midline.
Experiment 2
Behavioral Results
Trials in which responses were faster than 200 msec or
slower than 2400 msec were excluded from analyses (less
than 0.1% of all trials). As in Experiment 1, mean correct RTs
to targets were slower in blocks with color singleton dis-
tractors than in blocks without color distractors (924 msec
vs. 875 msec; t(11) = 6.5, p < .001). This distractor inter-
ference effect was again affected by the relative position
of targets and distractors. Slower RTs were observed for
trials in which targets and distractors appeared in the
same hemifield than for trials in which they were located
in opposite hemifields (959 msec vs. 893 msec; t(11) =
5.9, p < .001). Mean RT to targets on the vertical meridian
(and distractors on the left or right side) was 921 msec,
which was significantly slower than RTs on same-hemifield
trials and faster than RTs on opposite-hemifield trials
(both: t(11) > 3.6, p < .01). Importantly, the size of the
distractor-induced RT interference effect in Experiment 2
was significantly smaller than in Experiment 1 (49 msec
vs. 81 msec; F(1, 22) = 4.7, p < .05). As in Experiment 1,
this effect was smallest on trials in which targets and distract-
ors appeared on opposite sides, where it only approached
significance when compared with distractor-absent blocks
(t(11) = 1.9, p = .09). Error rates on target-present trials
were higher in blocks with color distractors relative to
distractor-absent blocks (5.8% vs. 4.6%; t(11) = 2.7, p <
.05). False alarms occurred on 0.6% of all target-absent
trials.
ERP Results
Figure 3 (top row) shows ERPs elicited at electrodes
PO7/PO8 in response to search arrays with a shape target
Figure 2. Grand-averaged
ERPs at posterior electrodes
PO7/PO8 contralateral and
ipsilateral to the location of the
target (top) when the distractor
singleton was absent (left),
when the distractor singleton
was in the same hemifield
(middle), and when it was in the
opposite hemifield (right) and
to the location of the distractor
singleton (bottom) in target-
absent trials (left) and in trials
when the target was on the
vertical meridian (right) in
Experiment 1.
754
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Volume 24, Number 3


stimulus on the left or right side, on trials without a color
singleton distractor, and on trials in which shape targets
were accompanied by a distractor in the same hemifield
or on the opposite side. Figure 3 (bottom row) shows
ERP waveforms to search arrays that included a color sin-
gleton distractor on the left or right side, on trials in
which no shape target was present, and on trials in which
a shape target was located on the vertical meridian. As in
Experiment 1, a pronounced N2pc was triggered in re-
sponse to search arrays that contained a lateral target stim-
ulus. However, and in marked contrast to Experiment 1, no
N2pc was elicited by lateral color singleton distractors.
Instead, a contralateral positivity (Pd) was observed in
the N2pc time interval on trials in which a lateral distractor
was accompanied by a midline target. These observations
were confirmed by analyses of ERP mean amplitudes ob-
tained at PO7/PO8 in the 220–300 msec poststimulus
interval.
Lateralized posterior ERP components triggered by target
stimuli.
A main effect of Contralaterality was present, F(1,
11) = 22.8, p < .001, demonstrating the presence of re-
liable N2pc components in response to target stimuli
(Figure 3, top row). There was also an interaction between
Contralaterality and Distractor Type, F(2, 22) = 6.2, p < .01,
as N2pc amplitudes were smaller on trials in which targets
and distractors appeared on the same side as compared
with opposite-side trials and distractor-absent trials. Two
follow-up analyses compared N2pc amplitudes on same-side
trials to amplitudes on opposite-side and distractor-
absent trials, respectively, with the Distractor Type (same-side
vs. opposite-side trials and same-side vs. distractor-absent
trials) as additional factor. Interactions between Contra-
laterality and Distractor Type were found in both analyses,
F(1, 11) = 8.6 and 7.3, both ps < .05, respectively, confirm-
ing that the N2pc amplitude on same-side trials was reliably
reduced relative to opposite-side and distractor-absent
trials. Analyses conducted separately for each distractor-
type array revealed that a reliable N2pc was triggered in re-
sponse to targets not only in trials in which distractors were
absent, F(1, 11) = 21.4, p < .001, and in trials with a distrac-
tor in the opposite hemifield, F(1, 11) = 21.4, p < .001, but
also in trials in which targets and distractors appeared in
the same hemifield, F(1, 11) = 14.3, p < .01.
Lateralized posterior ERP components triggered by
distractor stimuli.
The analysis of ERP mean amplitudes
obtained in the 220–300 msec poststimulus time window
in response to search arrays that contained lateral distrac-
tors without targets or with targets on the vertical midline
(Figure 3, bottom row) obtained a significant main effect
of contralaterality, F(1, 11) = 5.2, p < 05, and, importantly,
Figure 3. Grand-averaged
ERPs at posterior electrodes
PO7/PO8 contralateral and
ipsilateral to the location of the
target (top) when the distractor
singleton was absent (left),
when the distractor singleton
was in the same hemifield
(middle), and when it was in the
opposite hemifield (right) and
to the location of the distractor
singleton (bottom) in target-
absent trials (left) and in trials
when the target was on the
vertical meridian (right) in
Experiment 2.
Kiss et al.
755


an interaction between Contralaterality and Target Pres-
ence, F(1, 11) = 11.6, p < .01. A significant contralaterally
enhanced positivity (Pd) was triggered in response to dis-
tractors that were accompanied by a target on the midline,
F(1, 11) = 11.6, p < .01, whereas no lateralized effect was
present for lateral color singleton distractors in the absence
of a target stimulus, F < 1.
DISCUSSION
Is rapid attentional capture by salient but task-irrelevant
singleton stimuli a bottom–up phenomenon that is exclu-
sively driven by salience signals and is unaffected by cur-
rent task sets, or is this type of attentional capture
accessible to top–down control? Although ample behavioral
and ERP evidence for the task set contingent nature of
attentional capture has been found in spatial cueing experi-
ments, results from the additional singleton task have, so
far, provided apparently robust support for bottom–up
capture. The results of the present study demonstrate
that, even in this task, salience-driven singleton capture
is not triggered in an entirely automatic bottom–up fash-
ion but can be prevented by top–down control when this
is required by the temporal demands of an attentional
task.
We recorded lateralized posterior ERP components in
response to visual search arrays that could contain a
shape-defined singleton target and/or a task-irrelevant
color singleton. In Experiment 1, search arrays remained
visible until response onset, whereas display duration was
limited to 200 msec in Experiment 2. The ERP results of
Experiment 1 demonstrated that color singletons cap-
tured attention, although they were known to be task-
irrelevant. When these singleton distractors appeared on
the left or right side, an N2pc component was elicited,
both on trials in which they were accompanied by a
shape-defined target on the vertical midline and on trials
in which they were the only singleton in the display. The
presence of an N2pc to irrelevant color singletons mirrors
previous findings by Hickey et al. (2006) and confirms that
these stimuli can capture attention when search displays
remain visible until response onset. In marked contrast,
no N2pc was elicited by physically identical color single-
tons in Experiment 2, in which search arrays were visible
for only 200 msec. Instead, an enhanced contralateral
positivity (Pd) was observed in response to these stimuli
on trials in which they were accompanied by a shape tar-
get on the vertical midline. The Pd component has pre-
viously been interpreted as an ERP marker of top–down
inhibition of attentional capture (Sawaki & Luck, 2010;
Hickey et al., 2009). Its presence in Experiment 2 there-
fore suggests that, when the temporal demands on
attentional selectivity are increased, participants can suc-
cessfully inhibit attentional capture by salient but task-
irrelevant singletons. In target-absent trials, no lateralized
posterior ERP modulation was elicited by color distractors
in Experiment 2, which again contrasts with Experiment 1,
in which a reliable N2pc component was observed on
these trials.
To confirm the central finding that the pattern of later-
alized posterior ERP activity triggered by salient color dis-
tractors in the N2pc time range is determined by temporal
demands of an additional singleton task, two further ana-
lyses compared lateralized ERPs obtained at PO7/PO8 in
the 220–300 msec time window on target-present and
target-absent trials across both experiments, with the ad-
ditional between-subject factor display duration (long,
Experiment 1; short, Experiment 2). A significant inter-
action between display duration and contralaterality was
obtained for trials with lateral color distractors and mid-
line targets, F(1, 22) = 9.4, p < .01, reflecting a distractor-
triggered N2pc in Expriment 1 and a Pd in Experiment 2.
This interaction was also reliable for target-absent trials
with lateral distractors, F(1, 22) = 5.5, p < .05, reflecting
the presence of a distractor N2pc in Experiment 1 and its
absence in Experiment 2.
In Experiment 1, the N2pc to color singleton distractors
was followed by a lateralized posterior ERP modulation of
opposite polarity that started 300 msec after search array
onset (see Figure 2) and is likely to reflect a late-onset Pd
component. The presence of a Pd that was preceded by
an N2pc suggests a temporal sequence of attentional cap-
ture by salient distractors that is followed by active top–
down inhibition (similar to the scenario suggested by
Theeuwes, 2010). Notably, a similar pattern of an N2pc
followed by a Pd component was also present in the study
by Hickey et al. for search arrays with lateral distractors
and midline targets (Hickey et al., 2006, Figure 3B),
although no statistical analyses of time windows beyond
the N2pc were reported. It is plausible to assume that, after
the initial distractor-triggered attentional capture under
conditions of low temporal task demands, the subsequent
reallocation of attention toward the target location involves
the active inhibition of distractor locations and that this is
reflected in a late Pd component that follows the N2pc.
As expected, lateral shape singleton targets elicited a
robust N2pc component in both experiments, reflecting
attentional selection of these task-relevant stimuli. This
was the case regardless of whether targets appeared with-
out a color singleton distractor, with a distractor on the
same side, or with a distractor on the opposite side. Nota-
bly, even in Experiment 1 in which distractors triggered an
N2pc indicative of attentional capture on target-absent
trials and on trials with midline targets, ERPs to search ar-
rays with a lateral target and a color distractor in the oppo-
site hemifield revealed no evidence that salience-driven
attentional capture by color singletons was triggered be-
fore the attentional selection of shape targets. In contrast
to previous findings by Hickey et al. (2006), there was no
early distractor-elicited N2pc that preceded the target
N2pc, suggesting that even under conditions of low time
pressure, there was a consistent net attentional bias toward
the hemifield that contained the shape target. In both
experiments, there were target N2pc amplitude differences
756
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Volume 24, Number 3


between search displays with target and distractor single-
tons on the same or on different sides, and these can be
accounted for by the simultaneous presence of an early
or late Pd to color distractors. Because N2pc and Pd com-
ponents have opposite polarity, the net lateralized poste-
rior activity will be smaller on trials in which target and
distractor singletons are presented on the same side than
on trials in which they appear in opposite hemifields. This
was indeed the case in Experiment 2, in which distractors
triggered a Pd in the N2pc time range on target-present
trials, and target N2pc amplitude was reduced on same-
side trials. Similarly, in Experiment 1, in which distractors
triggered a late-onset Pd that followed the N2pc, the target
N2pc was less sustained on same-side than on opposite-
side trials (see Figure 2).
The presence of systematic differences between distractor-
triggered lateralized posterior ERP components observed
in these two experiments demonstrates that temporal de-
mands on attentional selectivity have a strong impact on the
processing of salient distractor singletons. These stimuli
triggered attentional capture with long-duration search dis-
plays in Experiment 1, as reflected by an N2pc, whereas
capture was inhibited for the short-duration displays in
Experiment 2, as indicated by the Pd component. Links be-
tween inhibitory top–down control and distractor-induced
attentional capture in the additional singleton paradigm are
also suggested by the results of a recent fMRI study by
Leber (2010). In this study, the magnitude of distractor
interference effects could be predicted by measuring pre-
trial activation in left middle frontal attentional control re-
gions, in line with the hypothesis that these areas mediate
resistance to attentional capture by salient but irrelevant
visual stimuli.
If capture was successfully prevented in Experiment 2,
why was there still a substantial distractor interference
effect (i.e., an RT difference between distractor-present
and distractor-absent trials) of nearly 50 msec? Although
such distractor-elicited RT costs are usually interpreted
as reflecting bottom–up attentional capture followed by
the time-consuming process of reallocating attention to
the target location, the spatial distribution of behavioral
interference effects does not support this interpretation.
These effects were strongly modulated by the relative po-
sitions of target and distractor singletons, as they were
largest in trials in which both appeared in the same hemi-
field, intermediate on trials with lateral distractors and
midline targets, and smallest on trials in which these two
singletons were located in opposite hemifields (see also
Mathôt, Hickey, & Theeuwes, 2010; Hickey et al., 2006,
for analogous results). If behavioral distractor interference
effects exclusively reflected capture and subsequent re-
orienting of attention, the opposite pattern should have
been observed, as attention shifts to the target should re-
quire less time when attention has already been moved to
a nearby location in the same hemifield than when it was
attracted by a distractor on the opposite side. The presence
of stronger interference by nearby distractors may instead
reflect competitive interactions between targets and salient
distractors, which are typically larger for stimuli that are
in close spatial proximity than for stimuli in opposite
hemifields (Mathôt et al., 2010; Mounts & Gavett, 2004).
To enable the selection of task-relevant visual events, this
competition needs to be resolved by top–down biases in
favor of targets and/or against distractors (Desimone &
Duncan, 1995). The observation that distractor inter-
ference effects were smaller in Experiment 2 than in Experi-
ment 1, although stimulus arrays were physically identical,
strongly suggests that such top–down biases were more
effective when temporal task demands were high, presum-
ably because of additional location-specific distractor inhi-
bition. The fact that substantial distractor interference
effects remained present in Experiment 2 indicates that
suppression of distractor-elicited capture only attenuated,
but did not completely eliminate, attentional competition
between target and distractor singletons. Such considera-
tions also suggest a modified concept of filtering costs in-
duced by salient but task-irrelevant singletons. Filtering
costs have previously been attributed to early stages of
perceptual encoding before selective attentional pro-
cessing (Folk & Remington, 1998). If salient singleton dis-
tractors are subject to inhibition when temporal task
demands are high, behavioral filtering costs might instead
arise as a consequence of competitive interactions between
targets and distractors that are modulated by top–down in-
hibitory control (see also Becker, 2007, for a more detailed
discussion of links between filtering costs and distractor
inhibition).
One final notable result of the present study was the ob-
servation that an early-onset Pd component was observed
in Experiment 2 for search arrays with lateral distractors
and midline targets, whereas no lateralized posterior ERP
component was triggered at all on trials in which these
distractors appeared without a shape target (Figure 3,
bottom). If high temporal task demands resulted in a rapid
top–down inhibition of salient color singleton distractors,
as argued before, one would assume that this process will
be triggered regardless of whether a shape-defined target is
also present in the display. The observation that a reliable
Pd component was only observed on trials with midline tar-
gets may suggest that distractor inhibition is not triggered
unconditionally but only after a rapid preattentive analysis
of the search display has uncovered evidence for the pre-
sence of a target. Active inhibition would then only be
applied to distractors in trials in which they compete for
attention with a simultaneously present target. It should,
however, be noted that the absence of lateralized posterior
modulations for averaged target-absent ERPs does not
prove the absence of distractor capture or distractor inhibi-
tion on single trials. If these two processes were elicited on
an approximately equal number of trials, the associated
N2pc and Pd components would cancel each other out, re-
sulting in no overall difference in averaged ERP waveforms.
Although the dependency of an early-onset Pd on the pres-
ence of a target observed in Experiment 2 is intriguing, the
Kiss et al.
757


functional significance of this observation will have to be
clarified in future experiments.
The conclusion from the present study that the ability of
salient but currently irrelevant visual stimuli to capture
attention in the additional singleton paradigm depends
on temporal task demands is in line with observations from
other recent experiments. For example, Sawaki and Luck
(2010) found a distractor-elicited Pd component indicative
of top–down inhibition under conditions in which search
display duration was short (200 msec). In a recent behav-
ioral study of memory-driven attentional capture from our
laboratory (Dalvit & Eimer, 2011), participants memorized
a color for subsequent recall before searching for a shape
singleton target that was presented together with an irrel-
evant color singleton distractor, which either matched or
did not match the memorized color. RTs were delayed
on trials with memory-matching distractors, reflecting
memory-driven attentional capture. Critically, this effect
was much larger in blocks in which search displays re-
mained visible until response onset than in blocks in which
search arrays were presented for only 200 msec (53 msec
vs. 17 msec), in line with the hypothesis that search can be
prioritized and shielded from interactions with working
memory when this is required by high temporal task de-
mands. In blocks in which display duration was randomized
and thus unpredictable, RT costs for trials with memory-
matching distractors did not differ between long and short
displays, demonstrating that these costs are not determined
by display duration as such but, instead, by top–down search
strategies that are linked to known temporal task demands.
In summary, the results of the current study provide
new evidence that, even in the additional singleton task,
attentional capture by salient but task-irrelevant stimuli is
not a purely bottom–up phenomenon that is inaccessible
to top–down processing strategies. Salient distractors will
indeed capture attention under conditions in which this
does not prevent the subsequent successful selection of
task-relevant targets. However, when search arrays are
presented very briefly, so that distractor-triggered atten-
tional capture will increase the likelihood that target stim-
uli are missed, salience-driven capture can be actively
inhibited by top–down control.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Biotechnology and Biological
Sciences Research Council (U.K.) and the Swiss National Science
Foundation (PBFRP1-133492).
Reprint requests should be sent to Martin Eimer, Department
of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck College, University of
London, Malet Street, London WC1E 7HX, United Kingdom,
or via e-mail: m.eimer@bbk.ac.uk.
REFERENCES
Ansorge, U., Kiss, M., Worschech, F., & Eimer, M. (2011).
The initial stage of visual selection is controlled by top–down
task set: New ERP evidence. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 73, 113–122.
Becker, S. (2007). Irrelevant singletons in pop-out search:
Attentional capture or filtering costs? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 33, 764–787.
Dalvit, S., & Eimer, M. (2011). Memory-driven attentional
capture is modulated by temporal task demands. Visual
Cognition, 19, 145–153.
Desimone, R., & Duncan, J. (1995). Neural mechanisms of
selective visual attention. Annual Review of Neuroscience,
18, 193–222.
Eimer, M. (1996). The N2pc component as an indicator of
attentional selectivity. Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology, 99, 225–234.
Eimer, M., & Kiss, M. (2008). Involuntary attentional capture
is determined by task set: Evidence from event-related
brain potentials. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20,
1423–1433.
Eimer, M., Kiss, M., Press, C., & Sauter, D. (2009). The roles
of feature-specific task set and bottom–up salience in
attentional capture: An ERP study. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 35,
1316–1328.
Folk, C. L., & Remington, R. W. (1998). Selectivity in
distraction by irrelevant featural singletons: Evidence for
two forms of attentional capture. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 24,
847–858.
Folk, C. L., Remington, R. W., & Johnston, J. C. (1992).
Involuntary covert orienting is contingent on attentional
control settings. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 18,
1030–1044.
Folk, C. L., Remington, R. W., & Wright, J. H. (1994). The
structure of attentional control: Contingent attentional
capture by apparent motion, abrupt onset, and color.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 20, 317–329.
Hickey, C., Di Lollo, V., & McDonald, J. J. (2009).
Electrophysiological indices of target and distractor
processing in visual search. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 21, 760–775.
Hickey, C., McDonald, J. J., & Theeuwes, J. (2006).
Electrophysiological evidence of the capture of visual
attention. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18,
604–613.
Kahneman, D., Treisman, A., & Burkell, J. (1983). The
cost of visual filtering. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
9, 510–522.
Leber, A. B. (2010). Neural predictors of within-subject
fluctuations in attentional control. Journal of Neuroscience,
30, 11458–11465.
Lien, M.-C., Ruthruff, E., Goodin, Z., & Remington, R. W. (2008).
Contingent attentional capture by top–down control
settings: Converging evidence from event-related potentials.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 34, 509–530.
Luck, S. J., & Hillyard, S. A. (1994). Spatial filtering during
visual search: Evidence from human electrophysiology.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 20, 1000–1014.
Mathôt, S., Hickey, C., & Theeuwes, J. (2010). From
reorienting of attention to biased competition: Evidence
from hemifield effects. Attention, Perception & Psychophysics,
72, 651–657.
758
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Volume 24, Number 3


Mounts, J. R. W., & Gavett, B. E. (2004). The role of salience
in localized attentional interference. Vision Research, 44,
1575–1588.
Pinto, Y., Olivers, C. N. L., & Theeuwes, J. (2005). Target
uncertainty does not lead to more distraction by singletons:
Intertrial priming does. Perception & Psychophysics, 67,
1354–1361.
Sawaki, R., & Luck, S. (2010). Capture versus suppression
of attention by salient singletons: Electrophysiological
evidence for an automatic attend-to-me signal. Attention,
Perception & Psychophysics, 72, 1455–1470.
Theeuwes, J. (1991). Cross-dimensional perceptual selectivity.
Perception & Psychophysics, 50, 184–193.
Theeuwes, J. (1992). Perceptual selectivity for color and form.
Perception & Psychophysics, 51, 599–606.
Theeuwes, J. (2010). Top–down and bottom–up control of
visual selection. Acta Psychologica, 135, 77–99.
Theeuwes, J., Atchley, P., & Kramer, A. F. (2000). On the
time course of top–down and bottom–up control of visual
attention. In S. Monsell & J. Driver (Eds.), Attention and
performance XVIII (pp. 105–124). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Kiss et al.
759


