Accident Analysis and Prevention 148 (2020) 105748
Available online 22 October 2020
0001-4575/© 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Predicting driver takeover performance in conditionally automated driving 
Na Du a, Feng Zhou b, Elizabeth M. Pulver c, Dawn M. Tilbury d, Lionel P. Robert e, 
Anuj K. Pradhan f, X. Jessie Yang a,* 
a Industrial and Operations Engineering, University of Michigan, United States 
b Industrial and Manufacturing Systems Engineering, University of Michigan-Dearborn, United States 
c State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Company, United States 
d Mechanical Engineering, University of Michigan, United States 
e School of Information, University of Michigan, United States 
f Industrial and Mechanical Engineering, University of Massachusetts Amherst, United States   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Transition of control 
Predictive modeling 
Human–automation interaction 
Human–autonomy interaction 
Human–robot interaction 
A B S T R A C T   
In conditionally automated driving, drivers have difficulty taking over control when requested. To address this 
challenge, we aimed to predict drivers’ takeover performance before the issue of a takeover request (TOR) by 
analyzing drivers’ physiological data and external environment data. We used data sets from two human-in-the- 
loop experiments, wherein drivers engaged in non-driving-related tasks (NDRTs) were requested to take over 
control from automated driving in various situations. Drivers’ physiological data included heart rate indices, 
galvanic skin response indices, and eye-tracking metrics. Driving environment data included scenario type, 
traffic density, and TOR lead time. Drivers’ takeover performance was categorized as good or bad according to 
their driving behaviors during the transition period and was treated as the ground truth. Using six machine 
learning methods, we found that the random forest classifier performed the best and was able to predict drivers’ 
takeover performance when they were engaged in NDRTs with different levels of cognitive load. We recom­
mended 3 s as the optimal time window to predict takeover performance using the random forest classifier, with 
an accuracy of 84.3% and an F1-score of 64.0%. Our findings have implications for the algorithm development of 
driver state detection and the design of adaptive in-vehicle alert systems in conditionally automated driving.   
1. Introduction 
While automated vehicles are poised to revolutionize surface trans­
portation, they introduce new challenges. One of the challenges is 
takeover transitions in conditionally automated driving (Ayoub et al., 
2019; Zhou et al., 2020b). In conditionally automated driving, drivers 
are no longer required to actively monitor the driving environment and 
are allowed to fully engage in non-driving-related tasks (NDRTs) (So­
ciety of Automotive Engineers, 2018). However, serving as a fallback for 
the automation, drivers are required to take over control of the vehicle 
whenever the automated system reaches its operational limit. 
Previous studies showed that the limited driver–vehicle interaction 
in conditionally automated driving increases the difficulty for drivers to 
take over control when requested (Eriksson and Stanton, 2017; Gold 
et al., 2016; Petersen et al., 2019). In response to such difficulty, 
empirical studies have investigated the factors that influence drivers’ 
takeover performance, including drivers’ cognitive and emotional states 
(Du et al., 2020; Wan and Wu, 2018; Zeeb et al., 2017) and driving 
environments (Gold et al., 2016; Li et al., 2018). 
These studies shed light on the relationships between certain factors 
and takeover performance; for instance, high traffic density harmed 
takeover performance (Gold et al., 2016). However, with few exceptions 
(Gold et al., 2018; Braunagel et al., 2017), little effort has been made to 
integrate these findings into computational models that are capable of 
predicting drivers’ takeover performance in real time. In the present 
study, therefore, we aimed to fill the research gap and to predict drivers’ 
takeover performance when they were engaged in NDRTs with different 
levels of cognitive load. 
1.1. Factors influencing takeover performance 
To facilitate takeover transitions, empirical research has been con­
ducted to examine factors that influence drivers’ takeover performance. 
The factors include drivers’ cognitive and emotional states when 
* Corresponding author at: 1205 Beal Avenue, Ann Arbor, MI 48015, United States. 
E-mail address: xijyang@umich.edu (X.J. Yang).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Accident Analysis and Prevention 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/aap 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2020.105748 
Received 15 March 2020; Received in revised form 5 July 2020; Accepted 22 August 2020   


Accident Analysis and Prevention 148 (2020) 105748
2
performing different types of NDRTs (Wan and Wu, 2018; Zeeb et al., 
2017; Du et al., 2020) in different driving environments (Gold et al., 
2016; Li et al., 2018). Takeover performance consists of takeover 
timeliness (i.e., takeover reaction time) and takeover quality (e.g., 
speed, acceleration and jerk statistics, time/distance to collision statis­
tics, lane deviation statistics, and crash rate). 
The types of NDRTs have been found to influence takeover perfor­
mance. Previous studies showed that compared with not performing an 
NDRT, those engaged in NDRTs had longer takeover reaction times, 
more crashes in high-traffic situations, and shorter minimum time to 
collision (TTC) (Eriksson and Stanton, 2017; Gold et al., 2016; Wan and 
Wu, 2018). The effects of NDRT modality on takeover performance were 
also explored. For example, Radlmayr et al. (2014) and Wandtner et al. 
(2018) reported that a visual task with handheld devices degraded 
takeover performance and led to a higher collision rate, while an audi­
tory task led to comparable performance to a baseline without any task. 
Zeeb et al. (2016) and Zeeb et al. (2017) explored the effects of manual 
and cognitive task load and found that a high level of manual task load 
increased reaction time and deteriorated takeover quality, while the 
effect of cognitive task load on takeover ability was dependent on the 
type of driver intervention. A high level of cognitive load lengthened the 
reaction time and deteriorated takeover quality in steering maneuvers 
but not braking maneuvers. 
Driving environment factors include traffic density, road situations, 
and weather conditions. Heavy traffic density in takeover situations led 
to longer takeover time and worse takeover quality in the form of shorter 
time to collision, more collisions, and higher maximum accelerations 
(Gold et al., 2016; K¨orber et al., 2016; Radlmayr et al., 2014). Li et al. 
(2018) showed that drivers’ takeover reaction time to critical events in 
adverse weather conditions was longer on the highway compared to on 
city roads. Takeover request (TOR) lead time is the critical event onset 
for automation failures at the time of the TOR (McDonald et al., 2019). 
According to the complexity of driving environment and vehicle sensor 
capability, commonly used TOR lead times range from 1 to 30 s 
(Eriksson et al., 2018). Research has demonstrated that shorter TOR lead 
time degraded takeover quality, as demonstrated by higher crash rates, 
greater maximum accelerations and greater standard deviation of 
steering wheel angle (Mok et al., 2015; van den Beukel and van der 
Voort, 2013; Wan and Wu, 2018). 
Most of these studies focused on the effects of certain variables on 
takeover performance, providing valuable yet largely relational insights. 
For instance, heavy traffic density led to longer takeover time. However, 
knowing the relationships between certain factors and takeover per­
formance is not enough to accurately predict a driver’s takeover per­
formance in the real world because many influential factors could 
interact with one another. Computational models capable of predicting 
drivers’ takeover performance under various takeover conditions in real 
time are needed. 
1.2. Predicting drivers’ states through physiological measurements 
With advances in wearable technology, it is possible to collect 
drivers’ physiological signals, such as gaze behaviors, heart rate activity, 
and galvanic skin responses, for a reliable reflection of their cognitive 
and emotional states in conditionally automated driving. 
Drivers’ gaze behavior is a valid tool for measuring cognitive load 
(Solovey et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2014; Gold et al., 2016; Zeeb et al., 
2016; Luo et al., 2019) and visual scanning patterns have been shown to 
indicate situational awareness (Ratwani et al., 2010; Young et al., 2013; 
Bertola and Balk, 2011). For example, Gold et al. (2016) found that 
horizontal gaze dispersion was the most sensitive measure of drivers’ 
cognitive demand in NDRTs during conditionally automated driving. 
Eyes-on-the-road percentage was found to be associated with drivers’ 
situational awareness and attention capture of the driving environments 
(Young et al., 2013; Molnar, 2017). 
Heart rate (HR) and heart rate variability (HRV) have both been used 
for assessing drivers’ workload in real time (Mehler et al., 2012, 2009; 
Zhou et al., 2020). Galvanic skin responses (GSRs) were found to reflect 
drivers’ mental activities, and their properties (amplitude, frequency) 
were used to indicate drivers’ changes of arousal related to events 
(Collet et al., 2009). GSRs have also been linked to drivers’ workload 
and stress (Schmidt et al., 2016; Jones et al., 2014; Wandtner et al., 
2018). 
Physiological data can thus be used to understand drivers’ cognitive 
and emotional states by applying machine learning models to continu­
ously monitored physiological data. The data captured via non-intrusive 
sensors can be used to build models that estimate drivers’ states and 
their interactions with the driving environments. Drivers’ physiological 
signals combined with environment factors are promising indicators to 
predict takeover performance in conditionally automated driving in real 
time (Braunagel et al., 2017). 
1.3. Existing models for takeover performance prediction 
Although a substantial amount of research has identified factors that 
influence drivers’ takeover performance, there is a lack of research on 
the development of computational models for predicting drivers’ take­
over performance, with few exceptions (Gold et al., 2018; Braunagel 
et al., 2017). 
To predict takeover performance, Gold et al. (2018) analyzed 753 
takeover events using data from six driving simulator experiments and 
developed regression models. Their study modeled takeover perfor­
mance measures (e.g., take-over time, minimum TTC, brake application 
and crash probability) as a function of the time-budget, traffic density, 
non-driving-related task, repetition, the current lane and driver’s age. 
The models were validated using 729 takeover events from five addi­
tional experiments. The validation results showed that the regression 
models accurately predicted takeover time, time-to-collision and crash 
probability, and moderately predicted the brake application. 
Braunagel et al. (2017) used machine learning algorithms to predict 
drivers’ takeover quality (named as “takeover readiness” in the article). 
The study categorized takeover quality into low and high levels by 
analyzing driving parameters such as lane deviations. Data were 
collected from a driving simulator study with 81 participants. The first 
feature input was situation complexity with three levels decided by 
raters; the second set of features was the type of NDRTs performed by 
drivers; and the third set of features was drivers’ gazes at the road. Using 
machine learning algorithms including k-nearest neighbors (kNN), 
support vector machine (SVM) with radial basis function (RBF) and 
linear kernel, Naive Bayes and linear discriminant, they predicted 
takeover quality with an accuracy of 79% and F1-score of 77%. 
However, the above-mentioned models were developed and tested 
when drivers were engaged in different types of NDRTs (e.g., monitoring 
vs. reading), where apparent contextual cues existed to discriminate 
drivers’ states. In daily life, even with a specific type of NDRTs such as 
writing an email, drivers’ states can be rather different depending on the 
importance of the email. Also, some factors deliberately manipulated in 
the experiment settings such as emotions are not easily accessible in the 
real world. Although the advanced wearable technology has made it 
convenient to collect drivers’ physiological signals to reflect their 
cognitive and emotional states, only gaze behaviors were used in pre­
vious studies. 
1.4. The present study 
Our study contributes to the literature in three aspects. First, our 
study aimed to predict drivers’ takeover performance when they were 
engaged in a specific type of NDRTs with different levels of cognitive 
load. Second, in addition to gaze behaviors, we used drivers’ heart rate 
indices and galvanic skin response indices to indicate their interaction 
with environments, which might improve prediction results. Third, our 
study employed a random forest model in addition to the machine 
N. Du et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       


Accident Analysis and Prevention 148 (2020) 105748
3
learning models used in previous studies to predict takeover perfor­
mance. Random forests have been proved to have great prediction 
performance for classification problems (Zhou et al., 2020; McDonald 
et al., 2014; Dietterich, 1997). 
In this paper, data from two human subject experiments were used 
for model development. We collected drivers’ galvanic skin responses 
(Mehler et al., 2012; Collet et al., 2009; Wintersberger et al., 2018), 
heart rate activities (Mehler et al., 2012; Bashiri and Mann, 2014), and 
gaze behaviors (Radlmayr et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2014; Young et al., 
2013; Bertola and Balk, 2011), which have been used as valid signals to 
assess drivers’ cognitive and emotional states and their situational 
awareness of the driving environments. Using drivers’ physiological 
data and environment factors, we developed a random forest model that 
was able to predict drivers’ takeover performance with an accuracy of 
84.3% and an F1-score of 64.0% using a 3 s time window. Additionally, 
we identified the most important physiological measures for takeover 
performance prediction, which can be incorporated in practice to 
develop in-vehicle monitoring systems. Furthermore, the model can be 
used to guide the design of adaptive in-vehicle alert systems to improve 
takeover performance in conditionally automated driving. 
2. Dataset 
The data used in the development of algorithms were collected in 
two studies. Both studies complied with the American Psychological 
Association code of ethics and were approved by the institutional review 
board at the University of Michigan. The first study investigated the 
effects of cognitive load, traffic density, and TOR lead time on takeover 
performance. The second study examined the effects of scenario type 
and vehicle speed on takeover performance. Participants in both ex­
periments wore the same set of physiological sensors. The similar 
experimental settings in both studies make it possible to combine the 
two datasets. At the same time, the varieties of takeover conditions from 
the two studies increase model generalizability. 
2.1. Participants 
A total number of 102 university students (mean age = 22.9; stan­
dard deviation [SD] = 3.8; range = 18–38; 40 females and 62 males) 
participated in Study 1 and 40 university students (mean age = 22.8, 
SD = 3.9; 20 females and 20 males) participated in Study 2. All of the 
participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and a valid 
driver’s license. They received $30 in compensation for an hour of 
participation. 
2.2. Apparatus and stimuli 
Both studies were conducted in a fixed-base driving simulator from 
Realtime Technologies Inc. (RTI, MI, USA). The virtual world was 
projected on three front screens 16 ft away (120◦field of view), one rear 
screen 12 ft away (40◦field of view), and two side mirror displays (see 
Fig. 1a). 
This simulator was equipped with the Smart Eye four-camera eye- 
tracking system (Smart Eye, Sweden) that provided live head-pose, eye- 
blink, and gaze data (Fig. 2a). The sampling rate of the eye-tracking 
system is 120 Hz. The Shimmer3 GSR+ unit (Shimmer, MA, USA) 
including GSR electrodes and photoplethysmogram (PPG) probe was 
used to collect GSR and HR data with a sampling rate of 128 Hz (Fig. 2b). 
The iMotions software (iMotions, MA, USA) was used for physiological 
data synchronization and visualization in real time (Fig. 2c). 
The simulated vehicle was controlled by a steering wheel and pedal 
system embedded in a Nissan Versa car model. The vehicle was pro­
grammed to simulate SAE Level 3 automation, which handled the lon­
gitudinal and lateral control and navigation, and responded to traffic 
elements. Participants could press the button on the steering wheel to 
activate the automated mode, which was indicated by a green highlight 
on the dashboard and an auditory warning (“Automated mode 
engaged”). Once the AV reached its performance limit, an auditory TOR 
(“Takeover”) would be issued with the green highlight turning to black 
background on the dashboard. Although the Level 3 automation is 
considered to continue functioning for a certain period of time after 
issuing the TOR (ISO, 2020), we set the automated mode to be deacti­
vated at the time of TORs for drivers to take over control of the vehicle. 
The NDRT in both studies was a visual N-back memory task, adapted 
from the study of Jaeggi et al. (2008). The stimulus consisted of nine 
(3 × 3) squares with two human figures randomly in two of the nine 
squares. Each stimulus was presented for 500 ms in sequence with a 
2500–ms interval (Fig. 3). Participants were required to press the “Hit” 
button when the current stimulus was the same as the one presented N 
steps back in the sequence and press the “Reject” button otherwise. With 
different N values, participants were exposed to different cognitive load 
but the same manual and visual load. The reason for employing a visual 
task with manual input was that it simulated the eyes-off the road and 
hands-off the wheel condition. The task was running on an 11.6-in. 
touch screen tablet mounted in the vehicle (Fig. 1b). 
2.3. Experimental design 
Study 1 employed a within-subjects design with drivers’ cognitive 
load, traffic density, and TOR lead time as independent variables. The 
cognitive load refers to driver cognitive load prior to TORs and was 
manipulated via the difficulty of the NDRTs (low: 1-back memory task; 
high: 2-back memory task). The heavy- and no-traffic conditions had 15 
and 0 oncoming vehicles per kilometer, respectively (Gold et al., 2016). 
The TOR lead time, which refers to the critical event onset for failures at 
the time of the TOR (McDonald et al., 2019), was set at 4 or 7 s (Eriksson 
and Stanton, 2017). Based on prior literature (Koo et al., 2016; Miller 
et al., 2016; Molnar et al., 2018; Rezvani et al., 2016), eight takeover 
Fig. 1. RTI driving simulator at the UMTRI.  
N. Du et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       


Accident Analysis and Prevention 148 (2020) 105748
4
events were designed in urban and rural drives with typical roadway 
features: (1) bicyclists ahead, (2) construction zone on the left, (3) 
construction zone ahead, (4) sensor error on the right curve, (5) 
swerving vehicle ahead, (6) no lane markings on the curve, (7) sensor 
error on the left curve, and (8) police vehicle on shoulder. The order of 
cognitive load, traffic density and TOR lead time was counterbalanced 
via an 8 × 8 balanced Latin square across participants. Considering 
standard programming practices for the simulator, the order of scenario 
presentations was counterbalanced by having half of the participants 
drive from Events 1 to 8, and the other half from Events 8 to 1. 
Study 2 used a mixed design with scenario type (lane keeping vs. lane 
changing) as the between-subjects variable and vehicle speed (35 vs. 
60 mph) as the within-subjects variable. Similar to the first study, eight 
scenarios were designed on the basis of realistic situations and previous 
literature (Miller et al., 2016; Koo et al., 2016; Rezvani et al., 2016; Zeeb 
et al., 2016; Naujoks et al., 2014). Lane-keeping scenarios, which 
required drivers to keep in the current lane, included (1) sensor error on 
the left curve, (2) construction zone on the left, (3) no lane markings on 
the curve, (4) sensor error on the right curve. Lane-changing scenarios, 
which required drivers to change to the neighboring lane, included (1) 
stranded vehicle ahead, (2) construction zone ahead, (3) construction 
barrier ahead, and (4) police vehicle on shoulder. According to the range 
of the Velodyne Lidar sensors (Velodyne Lidar, CA, USA), we set the 
distance between obstacle/entrance of the curve and the AV at 100 m 
when the TOR was issued. Generally, traffic consisted of 15 oncoming 
vehicles per kilometer (Gold et al., 2016). The order of the vehicle speed 
was counterbalanced among participants. The order of scenarios was 
counterbalanced by having half of the participants drive from Events 1 
to 4, and the other half from Events 4 to 1. 
In both studies, drivers started from the right lane, and were asked to 
stay in the right lane before they engaged the automated mode. Thus, 
the AV was always in the right lane prior to the TORs and the objects 
could be pre-coded to appear in front of the vehicle in lane-changing 
scenarios. With two lanes in lane-changing scenarios, drivers could 
avoid the objects in their lane by changing to the adjacent lane because 
there were no other vehicles in the driver’s direction. The speed of the 
subject vehicle was 35 mph in the urban/rural and 60 mph in the 
highway environments. The radius of curves was 400 m in the highway 
and 100 m in the urban/rural environments. Participants were asked to 
follow the speed limit throughout the drive. 
2.4. Experimental procedure 
The procedures of the two studies were almost the same. After par­
ticipants signed an informed consent form and completed an online 
demographics questionnaire, they were asked to track six targets on the 
front screen for eye-tracking calibration. Next, two GSR electrodes were 
attached to their left foot and the PPG probe to their left ear lobe. Par­
ticipants were informed that there was no need to actively monitor the 
driving environments or take over control of the vehicle as long as the 
vehicle was in automated mode. 
Participants had a 2-min practice for the N-back memory task, fol­
lowed by a 5-min practice drive to get familiar with the simulator 
environment. Next, each participant drove two experimental drives 
(10–20 min each), each containing four (Study 1) or two (Study 2) 
takeover events. At the beginning of the drive, participants were asked 
to activate the AV mode and then start the N-back task when the audio 
command “Please start the NDRT” was issued. After about 90 s of NDRT, 
a TOR was issued unexpectedly, and participants were required to 
terminate the NDRT manually by pressing the “end” button on the tablet 
screen and take over the control immediately. When participants 
thought they had negotiated the takeover event, they were free to re- 
activate the AV mode. Participants were informed that they would get 
an additional $20 if their NDRT performance was ranked in the top 10 of 
all participants. The operation of the NDRT, the takeover, and the AV 
mode activation were repeated for each takeover event (Fig. 4). 
3. Takeover performance model development 
We collected drivers’ physiological data, driving behaviors, and 
environment-related data. The physiological measures included heart 
rate indices, galvanic skin response indices and eye-tracking metrics. 
Because of malfunctions of the driving simulator and physiological 
sensors, data from 13 participants were excluded and those of the other 
129 participants (i.e., 828 takeover scenarios) were available for further 
analysis. 
To develop the prediction model, we first pre-processed the raw data 
and then extracted 37 features and set the ground truth. Next, we used a 
Fig. 2. (a) Smart Eye. (b) Shimmer3 GSR+ unit. (c) iMotions software.  
Fig. 3. N-back memory task.  
N. Du et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       


Accident Analysis and Prevention 148 (2020) 105748
5
10-fold nested cross-validation method to tune hyper-parameters, train 
models, and predict test instances for model comparisons. Particularly, 
we resampled the training dataset and normalized the entire dataset 
before performing the classification. Fig. 5 shows the modeling process. 
3.1. Data pre-processing 
For GSR signals, we used continuous decomposition analysis (CDA) 
to decompose the GSR signal into phasic and tonic components, 
respectively, via Ledalab in Matlab (Benedek and Kaernbach, 2010). 
Then we used the phasic component for further feature extraction 
because it is responsible for relatively rapid changes in response to 
specific events in the GSR signal (order of seconds). Heart rate measures 
were extracted from the raw RR interval using iMotions software. For 
eye-tracking data, only data points with high gaze quality value 
(threshold recommended by Smart Eye:.5) were recorded and used for 
analysis. 
3.2. Feature generation and ground truth 
To fit time series data into the supervised learning framework, we 
aggregated the values of physiological data within a sliding “time win­
dow” and calculated various statistics (Anderson, 2011). The end of the 
time window is the time of a TOR, and the start of the time window is X 
seconds before the TOR, ranging from 1 to 30 s. Model inputs included 
data on gaze behaviors, galvanic skin response indices, and heart rate 
indices, as well as environment factors. The generated features are listed 
in Table 1. A fixation is defined as “a relatively stable eye-in-head po­
sition within some threshold of dispersion (typically ~2◦) over some 
minimum duration (typically 100–200 ms), and with a velocity below 
some threshold (typically 15–100◦per second)” (Jacob and Karn, 2003). 
In the Smart Eye eye-tracking system, all frames with a gaze velocity 
below the fixation threshold (100◦per second) were treated as a fixa­
tion. All frames with the gaze velocity above the saccade threshold (100◦
per second) were treated as a saccade. We categorized area of interests 
(AOIs) into driving scenes, the NDRT tablet, and other areas. The 
number and average duration of fixations and saccades were accumu­
lated within the certain AOI. The scan pattern is the probability of eyes 
switching from one AOI to another. Traffic density, TOR lead time, and 
scenario type were used to describe the driving environments because 
they indicated the predictability, criticality, and urgency of the takeover 
scenarios (Gold et al., 2017). To reduce the potential impact of indi­
vidual differences, we normalized the feature values across participants 
using the min-max normalization approach. 
We used driving behaviors during takeover transitions to assess 
drivers’ takeover performance. As shown in Table 2, for different take­
over scenarios, we selected different metrics in the assessment. 
Fig. 4. Illustration of the experimental procedure for two takeover events.  
Fig. 5. Modeling process (RF = random forest; SVM = support vector machine; 
NB = Naive Bayes; kNN = k-nearest neighbors; DA = discriminant analysis; 
LR = logistic regression). 
Table 1 
Descriptions of generated features (HR = heart rate; min = minimum; 
max = maximum; GSR = galvanic skin responses; NDRT = non-driving-related 
task; TOR = takeover request).  
Feature 
Explanations 
HR indices 
Mean, min, max, and standard deviation of heart rate, inter-beat 
interval 
GSR indices 
Mean, max, and standard deviation of GSR in phasic component 
GSR peak 
The number of GSR peaks, and peak rise time 
Fixation 
Fixation number and duration in different areas of interests (AOIs) 
(i.e., driving scenes and NDRT tablet) 
Saccade 
Saccade number in different AOIs (i.e., driving scenes and NDRT 
tablet) 
Pupil 
The mean and standard deviation of pupil diameter in different 
AOIs (i.e., driving scenes and NDRT tablet) 
Blink 
The number of blinks 
Gaze 
dispersion 
Standard deviation of the values for gaze angle from right front 
(radians) 
Eyes-on-the- 
road 
The proportion of time that participants’ gazes are on the road 
Scan pattern 
The probability of eyes switching from one AOI to another (i.e., the 
probability that drivers transited eyes from driving scenes to NDRT 
tablet, from NDRT tablet to driving scenes, or from other areas to 
driving scenes) 
Traffic density 
No or heavy oncoming traffic 
Scenario type 
Lane-keeping or lane-changing scenarios 
TOR lead time 
Short (3–4 s) or long (6–7 s) TOR lead time  
Table 2 
Takeover situations and corresponding driving behavior variables to determine 
takeover 
performance 
(TOR = takeover 
request; 
min = minimum; 
max = maximum; TTC = time to collision).  
Takeover 
reactions 
Driving behavior variables (range for bad performance group) 
Lane 
changing 
TOR reaction 
time (>μ + 2σ) 
Max resulting 
acceleration 
(>μ + 2σ) 
log(Min TTC) 
(<μ −2σ) 
Lane keeping 
TOR reaction 
time (> μ + 2σ) 
Max resulting 
acceleration 
(>μ + 2σ) 
Standard deviation of 
road offset (>μ + 2σ)  
N. Du et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       


Accident Analysis and Prevention 148 (2020) 105748
6
Minimum TTC was calculated only for the lane-changing scenarios, and 
standard deviation of road offset was calculated only for the lane- 
keeping scenarios. All the driving variables were calculated following 
prior studies (Du et al., 2020; Clark and Feng, 2017). If any of the 
calculated TOR reaction time, maximum resulting acceleration, and 
standard deviation of road offset values were larger than μ + 2σ, we 
categorized a takeover transition as a bad performance. For minimum 
TTC, because the value of μ −2σ was negative, we performed a log 
transformation first and categorized a takeover transition as bad if log 
(minimum TTC) was lower than μ −2σ (Braunagel et al., 2017). For a 
particular takeover event, as long as one of the driving variables in a 
certain takeover scenario was categorized as a bad performance, we 
labeled the scenario as a bad takeover performance. Scenarios that led to 
collisions were also categorized as bad performances. Eventually, we got 
an imbalanced dataset with 109 “bad performance” labels and 719 
“good performance” labels. The reasons that we used categorical take­
over performance rather than individual driving variables as model 
output were that (1) it combines multiple aspects of driving behaviors 
and (2) it is easy to be explained to drivers and more practical to guide 
driver behaviors. 
3.3. Model development 
The takeover performance prediction model was trained with a 
random forest model considering the following justifications. First, as an 
ensemble method, random forests are robust for new data generalization 
and against training data overfitting (Quinlan, 1996). Second, random 
forests can give us feature importance and makes models interpretable. 
Five other machine learning approaches mentioned in prior literature 
were applied for comparisons: k-nearest neighbors (kNN), support vec­
tor machine (SVM), Naive Bayes (NB), discriminant analysis (DA), and 
logistic regression (LR). 
Considering the challenge of human behavior data collection, we 
used a 10-fold nested cross-validation method to train models and 
compare test results (Lee et al., 2013; Varma and Simon, 2006). As 
shown in Fig. 5, the 9-fold training and validation set (N = 116 subjects) 
was used to tune the hyper-parameters with the inner loop and then 
create classifiers. To handle the imbalanced dataset during the training, 
we employed a hybrid method of undersampling and oversampling 
(Choirunnisa and Lianto, 2018). The elimination process was done by 
deleting 300 good takeover performance scenarios randomly (Prusa 
et al., 2015). Then we used Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique 
(SMOTE) to create a balanced training and validation dataset with 678 
data points (Chawla et al., 2002). Table 3 demonstrates the training 
procedures of six machine learning approaches. The model assessment 
was based on the remaining 1-fold testing set (N = 13 subjects) with the 
outer loop. Notably, the subject data used for testing were not seen in the 
model training and validation stage. The random selection of 1-fold test 
dataset assumed that its distribution of good and bad takeover perfor­
mance scenarios was similar to the whole dataset. With a 10-fold 
cross-validation, we can make sure all the data points in the dataset 
would appear once in the test dataset. The training and evaluation of the 
algorithm were implemented in Matlab 2018b (MathWorks, MA, USA). 
3.4. Model evaluation 
In a binary classification problem, there are four possible outcomes: 
true positive (TP), false positive (FP), true negative (TN), and false 
negative (FN). TP is the number of positive samples predicted as a 
positive class, FP is the number of negative samples predicted as a 
positive class, FN is the number of positive class samples predicted as a 
negative class and TN is the number of negative samples predicted as 
negative class. In this paper, we used four classification evaluation in­
dicators, including Precision, Recall, Accuracy, and F1-score, to carry 
out the evaluation of the model performance, which were defined as: 
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(1)  
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
(2)  
Accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + FP + TN + FN
(3)  
F1 −score = 2 × Precision × Recall
Precision + Recall
(4) 
Precision manifests how well the model predicts (i.e., a measure of 
exactness) and recall manifests how well the model does not miss the 
target (i.e., a measure of completeness). The F1 measure is the weighted 
harmonic mean of the two and represents a realistic measure of model 
performance. 
The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve plots the true 
positive rate (TPR) against the false positive rate (FPR) at different 
thresholds (i.e., classifier boundary). The area under the curve (AUC) 
ranges from 0 to 1 and represents the degree of separability. A higher 
value of AUC indicates better model performance. When AUC is.5, it 
means the model does not have any class separation capability. 
4. Results 
To improve the robustness of machine learning results, we ran the 
10-fold cross-validation 30 times (i.e., 30 different random seeds) for 
every machine learning method at each time window. We first ran an 
omnibus analysis of variance (ANOVA) to compare the performance of 
the six machine learning methods. After that, we compared the random 
forest model with the other five methods using the pairwise t-test to see 
whether the random forest model had the best performance. Similarly, 
we compared the prediction results of the random forest model with 
different feature subsets against the full feature model using pairwise t- 
test. We examined the effects of time window and individual feature on 
random forest prediction performance using ANOVA. All post hoc 
Table 3 
Machine learning techniques and training process.  
Machine learning 
approach 
Techniques 
Hyper-parameters 
Support vector 
machine (SVM) 
Embed the data in another 
dimensional space and find a soft 
margin that separates the classes 
with minimum classification error 
(Chen et al., 2004) 
Kernel, regularization 
parameter 
Naive Bayesian 
(NB) 
Use maximum likelihood 
estimation to estimate parameters 
(i.e., prior probability and 
likelihood) (Rish, 2001) 
None 
Random forest 
(RF) 
Fit an algorithm on a set of 
bootstrapping samples (bagging) 
and predictors, i.e., randomly 
select training samples with 
replacement and take a random 
set of predictors at each node 
without replacement. Repeat 
many times to form an ensemble 
of trees (Breiman, 1996, 2001) 
Tree number, predictor 
number per split, leaf 
size 
k-nearest 
neighbor (kNN) 
Calculate Euclidean distance 
between labeled and unlabeled 
points to find the k-nearest 
neighbors. Use the majority vote 
criteria to decide unlabeled points 
(Keller et al., 1985) 
k 
Discriminant 
analysis (DA) 
Find separating hyperplane using 
parameter estimation (Friedman, 
1989) 
Discriminant type, 
Regularization 
parameter 
Logistic 
regression (LR) 
Estimate the parameters of a 
logistic model (Lee et al., 2006) 
Regularization 
parameter  
N. Du et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       


Accident Analysis and Prevention 148 (2020) 105748
7
comparisons used a Bonferroni α correction. 
4.1. Model performance comparisons 
Figs. 6 and 7  show the average model accuracy and F1-score at 
different time windows. There was a main effect of machine learning 
approaches on the prediction accuracy (F(5, 5399) = 13, 550, p < .001) 
and F1-score (F(5, 5399) = 4705, p < .001). Table 4 shows the pairwise 
t-tests comparing the predictive performance of the random forest model 
with the other five models across different time windows. The results 
indicate that our proposed random forest model outperformed the other 
five models across time windows. 
Fig. 8 shows the ROC curves of the random forest and the other five 
machine learning approaches with the optimal hyper-parameters. The 
curve of the random forest is above and to the left of the other five curves 
at the majority of thresholds. Consistent with accuracy and F1-score 
results, the ROC curve comparisons demonstrated that the random for­
est model outperformed the other five models. 
4.2. Effects of window size on random forest prediction results 
There was a main effect of time window on the random forest model 
accuracy (F(29, 899) = 16, p < .001) and F1-score (F(29, 899) = 9, 
p < .001). When applying an algorithm in real-world driving, a time 
window with shorter size and better prediction performance is 
preferred. According to Figs. 6 and 7, we recommend 3 s as the optimal 
time window to predict takeover performance, with an average F1-score 
of 64.0% and accuracy of 84.3% (tuned hyper-parameters: the number 
of trees = 300; minimum leaf size = 2; the number of predictors per 
decision split = 6). Post hoc analysis showed that F1-score at the 3 s time 
window significantly outperformed the rest of the time windows except 
5–8, 11–20, and 28–30 s (see Fig. 7). Accuracy at the 3 s time window 
significantly outperformed the rest of the time windows except 4, 6, 11, 
and 13–16 s (see Fig. 6). 
4.3. The confusion matrix and feature importance 
Fig. 9 shows the confusion matrix when the time window was 3 s. 
The precision was 64.5% and the recall was 63.9%, accounting for 
balanced completeness and exactness of prediction. 
Furthermore, by permuting the out-of-bag data (i.e., 36.8% of the 
total data that were not in the bootstrap samples) randomly across one 
predictor at a time and by measuring how much this permutation 
reduced the accuracy of the model, we estimated the feature impor­
tance. The values indicate each feature’s relative importance in pre­
dicting the takeover performance (the larger values are, the more 
important features are). Fig. 10 illustrates the out-of-bag estimates of 
feature importance of the 37 predictor variables when the time window 
was 3 s. Table 5 lists the top 16 important predictor variables. As shown 
in the table, we found that some heart rate indices and GSR indices (e.g., 
maximum and mean phasic GSRs, mean of heart rate) were important in 
predicting takeover performance, but were not included in prior take­
over performance algorithm development (Gold et al., 2018; Braunagel 
et al., 2017). 
4.4. Effects of features on random forest prediction results 
The main effect of feature set on the model accuracy (F(3, 
119) = 304, p < .001) and the F1-score (F(3, 119) = 146, p < .001) were 
significant at the 3 s time window. We found that the accuracy and F1- 
score of the random forest model using the full feature set were signif­
icantly higher than the accuracy and F1-score using other combinations 
of feature subsets at the 3 s time window (Fig. 11 and Table 6). To be 
specific, if only environment factors were used as the features, the 
average prediction accuracy and F1-score were only.758 and.611, 
respectively. If only physiological data were used as features, the 
average prediction accuracy was.770 and F1 score was.563. This sug­
gests that a combination of environment features and features indicating 
drivers’ states are necessary to build a model with high performance. 
The model using environment factors and eye-tracking metrics as fea­
tures had an average accuracy of.818 and F1-score of.615 at the 3 s time 
window. After adding heart rate and galvanic skin response indices as 
features, the average model accuracy increased to.843 and F1-score 
increased to.640. 
In addition, we ordered features according to the average feature 
importance values. Next, we built a random forest model with the most 
important feature, and then added features with lower importance one 
by one to build another 36 models. As shown in Fig. 12, the model ac­
curacy and F1-score generally increased at the beginning when more 
features were added but reached a plateau when 16 or more features 
were included in the model. There was a main effect of feature numbers 
on the model accuracy (F(36, 1109) = 3718, p < .001) and F1-score (F 
(36, 1109) = 293, p < .001). Post hoc analysis showed that the F1-score 
of the full feature model was significantly higher than that for models 
with fewer than the top 9 important features, and accuracy of the full 
feature model was significantly higher than that of the models with 
fewer than the top 16 important features. 
5. Discussion 
5.1. Model performance comparisons 
Our study compared the random forest model with the other five 
machine learning approaches used in prior literature for takeover 
Fig. 6. Prediction accuracy of six machine learning approaches under different time windows (SVM = support vector machine; NB = Naive Bayes; DA = discriminant 
analysis; kNN = k-nearest neighbors; LR = logistic regression; RF = random forest). 
N. Du et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       


Accident Analysis and Prevention 148 (2020) 105748
8
performance prediction. As indicated by the results of model accuracy, 
F1-score, and ROC curve comparisons, the random forest approach 
outperformed the other classification approaches. Consistent with 
previous studies on drivers’ fatigue and drowsiness detection (McDonald 
et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2020a), the random forest approach also 
showed its supremacy for takeover performance prediction. It might be 
Fig. 7. F1 scores of six machine learning approaches under different time windows (SVM = support vector machine; NB = Naive Bayes; DA = discriminant analysis; 
kNN = k-nearest neighbors; LR = logistic regression; RF = random forest). 
Table 4 
The mean prediction accuracy and F1-score of machine learning approaches across time windows and their comparisons to the random forest model.  
Algorithm 
Accuracy 
F1-score  
Mean 
SD 
t-test statistic 
p-value 
Mean 
SD 
t-test statistic 
p-value 
Random forest 
.828 
.012 
– 
– 
.630 
.015 
– 
– 
Support vector machine 
.796 
.013 
60.5 
p < .001 
.580 
.019 
72.4 
p < .001 
Naive Bayes 
.760 
.033 
49.0 
p < .001 
.523 
.022 
107 
p < .001 
Discriminant analysis 
.722 
.021 
134 
p < .001 
.537 
.017 
131 
p < .001 
k-nearest neighbor 
.692 
.020 
209 
p < .001 
.550 
.020 
111 
p < .001 
Logistic regression 
.609 
.016 
342 
p < .001 
.588 
.009 
74.5 
p < .001  
Fig. 8. Receiver operating characteristic comparison plots for the random forest (RF) model and the five other models (SVM = support vector machine; LR = logistic 
regression; NB = Naive Bayes; DA = discriminant analysis; kNN = k-nearest neighbors). The bootstrapped (#1000) confidence intervals are indicated within the 
parentheses. 
N. Du et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       


Accident Analysis and Prevention 148 (2020) 105748
9
because random forests aggregate the results of many bootstrap aggre­
gated (bagged) decision trees, which reduces the effects of overfitting 
and improves generalization. 
5.2. Effects of window size on random forest prediction results 
As the random forest outperformed other machine learning ap­
proaches, we examined the prediction performance of random forests 
under different time window sizes. The results showed that the window 
size significantly influenced random forest prediction performance. 
However, such a relationship was not linear. One of the explanations 
could be that we used a mixture of physiological signals as model inputs. 
Some physiological signals (e.g., pupil diameter) perform better with a 
shorter window size because they change rapidly according to the 
changes in the driver’s cognitive workload (Kramer et al., 2013). Some 
physiological signals (e.g., heart rate) perform better with a longer 
window size because it can provide an overall understanding of the 
driver’s mental state (Solovey et al., 2014). Future research is needed to 
explore model performance with customized time windows for different 
physiological signals. 
It was important to find an optimal window size to calculate physi­
ological features for model development in this study. Considering the 
implementation in real-world driving, a time window with shorter size 
and better prediction performance is preferred. Thus, we recommend 3 s 
as the optimal time window to predict takeover performance, with an 
accuracy of 84.3% and an F1-score of 64.0%. The post hoc analysis 
showed that the selection of time window for such performance is not 
unique. Time windows with a size of 6, 11, and 13–16 s led to similar 
prediction performance. Although the exact time window might be 
slightly different in the real world given the differences of situational 
and behavioral parameters, our study provides important insights on 
window size recommendation for the development of driver state 
detection systems. 
Different from previous studies, our model has a finer granularity 
and can predict drivers’ takeover performance when they are engaged in 
a specific type of NDRTs with different levels of cognitive load. Such 
application differences make it infeasible to compare the exact accuracy 
and F1-score values with those in previous models. Because the test 
cases in our model prediction are from different participants and are not 
seen in the training set, our model can be used to predict takeover 
performance of a new driver who does not have historical data. 
5.3. Effects of features on random forest prediction results 
Drivers’ galvanic skin responses, heart rate activities, and eye 
movements with a combination of environment factors were used to 
predict drivers’ takeover performance. Compared to Braunagel et al. 
(2017), we added GSR indices and HR indices for model development. 
Our results showed an improvement of model performance with a full 
set of features compared to other feature subsets (i.e., physiological data 
only, environment data only, eye-tracking and environment data). This 
aligns with the previous studies because all these physiological signals 
reflected drivers’ states and interactions with driving environments 
(Mehler et al., 2012; Radlmayr et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2014; Ratwani 
et al., 2010; Young et al., 2013; Bertola and Balk, 2011). 
Furthermore, we identified the most important features (e.g., 
maximum phasic GSR, gaze dispersion, scenario type, and mean of inter- 
beat interval) for model development. Although the model performance 
increased at the beginning as more features were added, it reached a 
plateau when 16 or more features were included. With the top 16 
important features, we were able to develop a random forest model with 
comparable performance to the full feature model. Notably, the top 16 
important features were extracted from galvanic skin responses, heart 
rate activities, eye movements, and environment factors, demonstrating 
Fig. 9. Confusion matrix when time window was 3 s.  
Fig. 10. Feature importance when time window was 3 s.  
Table 5 
The top 16 important features when time window was 3s (GSR = galvanic skin 
response; NDRT = non-driving-related task).  
Feature descriptions 
Importance 
Maximum of GSR in phasic component 
.492 
Mean of GSR in phasic component 
.491 
Standard deviation of GSR in phasic component 
.441 
Vertical gaze dispersion 
.406 
Scenario type 
.404 
Fixation duration 
.371 
Fixation duration on the driving scene 
.352 
Fixation duration on the NDRT 
.341 
Takeover lead time 
.338 
Mean of inter-beat interval 
.333 
Mean of heart rate 
.330 
Eyes-on-the-road percentage 
.323 
Saccade number on the driving scenes 
.314 
Maximum heart rate 
.295 
Fixation number on the driving scenes 
.282 
Standard deviation of inter-beat interval 
.268  
Fig. 11. Prediction accuracy and F1-score of random forests with different 
feature subsets at the 3 s time window. Error bar indicates 1 standard deviation. 
N. Du et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       


Accident Analysis and Prevention 148 (2020) 105748
10
the importance of all these data sources. Utilizing the advances of 
wearable technology and vehicle sensors, these features can be collected 
in a minimally invasive manner to predict drivers’ takeover performance 
in real time. 
5.4. Limitations and future work 
Several limitations should be taken into consideration in the future. 
First, this study used a snapshot of the time-series data as model inputs 
without considering the complexity of sequence dependence among the 
data. Future study could try a convolutional neural network (CNN) 
combined with long-short-term memory (LSTM) to predict drivers’ 
takeover performance using a larger dataset. Second, the ground truth 
was determined by drivers’ driving behaviors. It is necessary to propose 
a standard set of metrics for measuring takeover performance. An 
ensemble method combining subjective ratings, driving behaviors and 
video coding can be explored to provide a more robust ground truth 
label of takeover performance. Third, instead of using dichotomous 
classification of takeover performance, we could increase the number of 
classes (e.g., bad, neutral, good; or very bad, bad, neutral, good, very 
good) or use regression to see model prediction power. Fourth, this study 
only recruited young adult participants with few AV experiences and 
each participant only experienced four or eight takeover scenarios in the 
whole experiment. Future studies could recruit participants from 
different ages, AV experience levels, and training groups. Then the in­
dividual characteristics and power law of learning could be taken into 
account as model inputs to increase the generalization of models (For­
ster et al., 2019). 
5.5. Implications 
Our study is a preliminary effort to predict drivers’ takeover per­
formance for designing advanced driver monitoring systems. With the 
advances of technologies in connected automated vehicle systems, real- 
time road environments such as traffic situations can be accessed easily 
in the future. Predictive model performance can be improved when data 
from various drivers engaging in different NDRTs in diverse environ­
ments are available for model training. The model outputs can 
contribute to the design of adaptive in-vehicle alert systems in condi­
tionally automated driving. Specifically, if the system predicted that a 
driver would not be able to take over control successfully, a multi-modal 
display could be designed to help the driver realize the urgency of the 
event, augment situational awareness and allocate attention properly. 
Eventually, it could improve drivers’ takeover performance and enhance 
the safety and adoption of automated vehicles. 
6. Conclusion 
This study developed a random forest model to predict drivers’ 
takeover performance in conditionally automated driving. In contrast to 
previous models capable of predicting drivers’ takeover performance 
when they performed different types of NDRTs, our model has a finer 
granularity and is able to predict takeover performance when drivers are 
engaged in a specific type of NDRTs. The results showed that the random 
forest classifier has an accuracy of 84.3% and an F1-score of 64.0% using 
a 3 s time window, which outperformed other machine learning models 
used in prior studies. In addition, we identified the most important 
physiological measures for takeover performance prediction, and they 
can be used for developing in-vehicle monitoring systems. Such models 
can be used to guide the design of adaptive in-vehicle alert systems to 
improve takeover performance in conditionally automated driving in 
the future. 
Authors’ contribution 
Na Du: conceptualization, methodology, software, formal analysis, 
writing – original draft. Feng Zhou, Dawn M. Tilbury, Lionel P. Robert 
and Anuj K. Pradhan: conceptualization, methodology, writing – 
reviewing and editing. Elizabeth Pulver: conceptualization, methodol­
ogy. X. Jessie Yang: conceptualization, methodology, writing- reviewing 
and editing, resources, supervision, funding acquisition. 
Declaration of competing interest 
none 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by University of Michigan Mcity and in part 
by the National Science Foundation. The views expressed are those of 
the authors and do not reflect the official policy or position of State 
Farm®. 
References 
Anderson, T.W., 2011. The Statistical Analysis of Time Series, Vol. 19. John Wiley & 
Sons. 
Ayoub, J., Zhou, F., Bao, S., Yang, X.J., 2019. From manual driving to automated driving: 
a review of 10 years of autoui. Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on 
Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications 
(AutomotiveUI’19). ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 70–90. 
Bashiri, B., Mann, D.D., 2014. Heart rate variability in response to task automation in 
agricultural semi-autonomous vehicles. Ergon. Open J. 7 (1), 6–12. 
Benedek, M., Kaernbach, C., 2010. A continuous measure of phasic electrodermal 
activity. J. Neurosci. Methods 190 (1), 80–91. 
Bertola, M.A., Balk, S.A., 2011. Eyes on the Road: A Methodology for Analyzing Complex 
Eye Tracking Data. 
Table 6 
Random forest prediction accuracy and F1-score with different feature subsets at the 3 s time window and their comparisons to the full feature model.  
Feature subsets 
Accuracy 
F1-score  
Mean 
SD 
t-test statistic 
p-value 
Mean 
SD 
t-test statistic 
p-value 
All 
.843 
.010 
– 
– 
.640 
.015 
– 
– 
Eye-tracking and environment 
.818 
.010 
11.2 
p < .001 
.615 
.013 
10.9 
p < .001 
Physiological 
.770 
.020 
17.2 
p < .001 
.563 
.019 
19.7 
p < .001 
Environment 
.758 
.005 
42.7 
p < .001 
.611 
.008 
8.82 
p < .001  
Fig. 12. Model accuracy and F1-score with different numbers of top important 
features. Error bar indicates 1 standard deviation. 
N. Du et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       


Accident Analysis and Prevention 148 (2020) 105748
11
Braunagel, C., Rosenstiel, W., Kasneci, E., 2017. Ready for take-over? A new driver 
assistance system for an automated classification of driver take-over readiness. IEEE 
Intell. Transp. Syst. Mag. 9 (4), 10–22. 
Breiman, L., 1996. Bagging predictors. Mach. Learn. 24 (2), 123–140. 
Breiman, L., 2001. Random forests. Mach. Learn. 45 (1), 5–32. 
Chawla, N.V., Bowyer, K.W., Hall, L.O., Kegelmeyer, W.P., 2002. Smote: synthetic 
minority over-sampling technique. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 16, 321–357. 
Chen, D.R., Wu, Q., Ying, Y., Zhou, D.X., 2004. Support vector machine soft margin 
classifiers: error analysis. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 5 (Sep), 1143–1175. 
Choirunnisa, S., Lianto, J., 2018. Hybrid method of undersampling and oversampling for 
handling imbalanced data. 2018 International Seminar on Research of Information 
Technology and Intelligent Systems (ISRITI). 276–280. 
Clark, H., Feng, J., 2017. Age differences in the takeover of vehicle control and 
engagement in non-driving-related activities in simulated driving with conditional 
automation. Accid. Anal. Prev. 106, 468–479. 
Collet, C., Clarion, A., Morel, M., Chapon, A., Petit, C., 2009. Physiological and 
behavioural changes associated to the management of secondary tasks while driving. 
Appl. Ergon. 40 (6), 1041–1046. 
Dietterich, T.G., 1997. Machine-learning research. AI Mag. 18 (4), 97. 
Du, N., Zhou, F., Pulver, E., Tilbury, D.M., Robert, L.P., Pradhan, A.K., Yang, X.J., 2020. 
Examining the effects of emotional valence and arousal on takeover performance in 
conditionally automated driving. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 112, 78–87. 
Eriksson, A., Petermeijer, S.M., Zimmermann, M., De Winter, J.C., Bengler, K.J., 
Stanton, N.A., 2018. Rolling out the red (and green) carpet: supporting driver 
decision making in automation-to-manual transitions. IEEE Trans. Hum.-Mach. Syst. 
49 (1), 20–31. 
Eriksson, A., Stanton, N.A., 2017. Takeover time in highly automated vehicles: 
noncritical transitions to and from manual control. Hum. Fact. 59 (4), 689–705. 
Forster, Y., Hergeth, S., Naujoks, F., Beggiato, M., Krems, J.F., Keinath, A., 2019. 
Learning to use automation: behavioral changes in interaction with automated 
driving systems. Transp. Res. Part F: Traff. Psychol. Behav. 62, 599–614. 
Friedman, J.H., 1989. Regularized discriminant analysis. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 84 (405), 
165–175. 
Gold, C., Happee, R., Bengler, K., 2018. Modeling take-over performance in level 3 
conditionally automated vehicles. Accid. Anal. Prev. 116, 3–13. 
Gold, C., K¨orber, M., Lechner, D., Bengler, K., 2016. Taking over control from highly 
automated vehicles in complex traffic situations: the role of traffic density. Hum. 
Fact. 58 (4), 642–652. 
Gold, C., Naujoks, F., Radlmayr, J., Bellem, H., Jarosch, O., 2017. Testing scenarios for 
human factors research in level 3 automated vehicles. International Conference on 
Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics 551–559. 
ISO, 2020. ISO/TR 21959-1: Road Vehicles – Human Performance and State in the 
Context of Automated Driving – Part 1: Common Underlying Concepts. 
Jacob, R.J., Karn, K.S., 2003. Eye tracking in human-computer interaction and usability 
research: READY to deliver the promises. The Mind’s Eye 573–605. 
Jaeggi, S.M., Buschkuehl, M., Jonides, J., Perrig, W.J., 2008. Improving fluid intelligence 
with training on working memory. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105 (19), 
6829–6833. 
Jones, M., Chapman, P., Bailey, K., 2014. The influence of image valence on visual 
attention and perception of risk in drivers. Accid. Anal. Prev. 73, 296–304. 
Keller, J.M., Gray, Givens, J.A., 1985. A fuzzy k-nearest neighbor algorithm. IEEE Trans. 
Syst. Man Cybern. 4, 580–585. 
Koo, J., Shin, D., Steinert, M., Leifer, L., 2016. Understanding driver responses to voice 
alerts of autonomous car operations. Int. J. Veh. Des. 70 (4), 377–392. 
K¨orber, M., Gold, C., Lechner, D., Bengler, K., 2016. The influence of age on the take-over 
of vehicle control in highly automated driving. Transp. Res. Part F: Traff. Psychol. 
Behav. 39, 19–32. 
Kramer, S.E., Lorens, A., Coninx, F., Zekveld, A.A., Piotrowska, A., Skarzynski, H., 2013. 
Processing load during listening: the influence of task characteristics on the pupil 
response. Lang. Cogn. Process. 28 (4), 426–442. 
Lee, J.J., Knox, B., Baumann, J., Breazeal, C., DeSteno, D., 2013. Computationally 
modeling interpersonal trust. Front. Psychol. 4, 893. 
Lee, S.I., Lee, H., Abbeel, P., Ng, A.Y., 2006. Efficient l 1 regularized logistic regression. 
Aaai, Vol. 6 401–408. 
Li, S., Blythe, P., Guo, W., Namdeo, A., 2018. Investigation of older driver’s takeover 
performance in highly automated vehicles in adverse weather conditions. IET Intell. 
Transp. Syst. 12 (9), 1157–1165. 
Luo, R., Wang, Y., Weng, Y., Paul, V., Brudnak, M.J., Jayakumar, P., Yang, X.J., 2019. 
Toward real-time assessment of workload: a Bayesian inference approach. 
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, Vol. 63 
196–200. 
McDonald, A.D., Alambeigi, H., Engstr¨om, J., Markkula, G., Vogelpohl, T., Dunne, J., 
Yuma, N., 2019. Toward computational simulations of behavior during automated 
driving takeovers: a review of the empirical and modeling literatures. Hum. Fact. 61 
(4), 642–688. 
McDonald, A.D., Lee, J.D., Schwarz, C., Brown, T.L., 2014. Steering in a random forest: 
ensemble learning for detecting drowsiness-related lane departures. Hum. Fact. 56 
(5), 986–998. 
Mehler, B., Reimer, B., Coughlin, J.F., 2012. Sensitivity of physiological measures for 
detecting systematic variations in cognitive demand from a working memory task: 
an on-road study across three age groups. Hum. Fact. 54 (3), 396–412. 
Mehler, B., Reimer, B., Coughlin, J.F., Dusek, J.A., 2009. Impact of incremental increases 
in cognitive workload on physiological arousal and performance in young adult 
drivers. Transp. Res. Rec. 2138 (1), 6–12. 
Miller, D., Johns, M., Mok, B., Gowda, N., Sirkin, D., Lee, K., Ju, W., 2016. Behavioral 
measurement of trust in automation: the trust fall. Proceedings of the Human Factors 
and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, Vol. 60 1849–1853. 
Mok, B., Johns, M., Lee, K.J., Miller, D., Sirkin, D., Ive, P., Ju, W., 2015. Emergency, 
automation off: Unstructured transition timing for distracted drivers of automated 
vehicles. 2015 IEEE 18th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation 
Systems 2458–2464. 
Molnar, L.J., 2017. Age-Related Differences in Driver Behavior Associated With 
Automated Vehicles and the Transfer of Control Between Automated And Manual 
Control: A Simulator Evaluation. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Transportation 
Research Institute. 
Molnar, L.J., Ryan, L.H., Pradhan, A.K., Eby, D.W., Louis, R.M.S., Zakrajsek, J.S., 2018. 
Understanding trust and acceptance of automated vehicles: An exploratory simulator 
study of transfer of control between automated and manual driving. Transp. Res. 
Part F: Traff. Psychol. Behav. 58, 319–328. 
Naujoks, F., Mai, C., Neukum, A., 2014. The effect of urgency of take-over requests 
during highly automated driving under distraction conditions. Adv. Hum. Aspects 
Transp. 7 (Part I), 431. 
Petersen, L., Robert, L., Yang, J., Tilbury, D., 2019. Situational awareness, driver’s trust 
in automated driving systems and secondary task performance. SAE Int. J. Connect. 
Auton. Veh. 2 (2) https://doi.org/10.4271/12-02-02-0009. 
Prusa, J., Khoshgoftaar, T.M., Dittman, D.J., Napolitano, A., 2015. Using random 
undersampling to alleviate class imbalance on tweet sentiment data. 2015 IEEE 
International Conference on Information Reuse and Integration 197–202. 
Quinlan, J.R., 1996. Bagging, Boosting, and c4.5. Aaai/iaai, Vol. 1 725–730. 
Radlmayr, J., Gold, C., Lorenz, L., Farid, M., Bengler, K., 2014. How traffic situations and 
non-driving related tasks affect the take-over quality in highly automated driving. 
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, Vol. 58 
2063–2067. 
Ratwani, R.M., McCurry, J.M., Trafton, J.G., 2010. Single operator, multiple robots: an 
eye movement based theoretic model of operator situation awareness. 2010 5th 
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human–Robot Interaction (HRI). 235–242. 
Rezvani, T., Driggs-Campbell, K., Sadigh, D., Sastry, S.S., Seshia, S.A., Bajcsy, R., 2016. 
Towards trustworthy automation: user interfaces that convey internal and external 
awareness. 2016 IEEE 19th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation 
Systems (ITSC). 682–688. 
Rish, I., 2001. An empirical study of the naive bayes classifier. IJCAI 2001 Workshop on 
Empirical Methods in Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 3 41–46. 
Schmidt, E., Decke, R., Rasshofer, R., 2016. Correlation between subjective driver state 
measures and psychophysiological and vehicular data in simulated driving. 2016 
IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) 1380–1385. 
Society of Automotive Engineers, 2018. Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to 
On-Road Motor Vehicle Automated Driving Systems. 
Solovey, E.T., Zec, M., Garcia Perez, E.A., Reimer, B., Mehler, B., 2014. Classifying driver 
workload using physiological and driving performance data: two field studies. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
4057–4066. 
van den Beukel, A.P., van der Voort, M.C., 2013. The influence of time-criticality on 
situation awareness when retrieving human control after automated driving. 16th 
International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC 2013). 
2000–2005. 
Varma, S., Simon, R., 2006. Bias in error estimation when using cross-validation for 
model selection. BMC Bioinformatics 7 (1), 91. 
Wan, J., Wu, C., 2018. The effects of lead time of take-over request and nondriving tasks 
on taking-over control of automated vehicles. IEEE Trans. Hum.-Mach. Syst. 99, 
1–10. 
Wandtner, B., Sch¨omig, N., Schmidt, G., 2018. Effects of non-driving related task 
modalities on takeover performance in highly automated driving. Hum. Fact. 60 (6), 
870–881. 
Wang, Y., Reimer, B., Dobres, J., Mehler, B., 2014. The sensitivity of different 
methodologies for characterizing drivers’ gaze concentration under increased 
cognitive demand. Transp. Res. Part F: Traff. Psychol. Behav. 26, 227–237. 
Wintersberger, P., Riener, A., Schartmüller, C., Frison, A.K., Weigl, K., 2018. Let me 
finish before i take over: towards attention aware device integration in highly 
automated vehicles. Proceedings of the 10th INTERNATIONAL CONFerence on 
Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications 53–65. 
Young, K.L., Salmon, P.M., Cornelissen, M., 2013. Missing links? The effects of 
distraction on driver situation awareness. Saf. Sci. 56, 36–43. 
Zeeb, K., Buchner, A., Schrauf, M., 2016. Is take-over time all that matters? The impact of 
visual-cognitive load on driver take-over quality after conditionally automated 
driving. Accid. Anal. Prev. 92, 230–239. 
Zeeb, K., H¨artel, M., Buchner, A., Schrauf, M., 2017. Why is steering not the same as 
braking?. the impact of non-driving related tasks on lateral and longitudinal driver 
interventions during conditionally automated driving. Transp. Res. Part F: Traff. 
Psychol. Behav. 50, 65–79. 
Zhou, F., Alsaid, A., Blommer, M., Curry, R., Swaminathan, R., Kochhar, D., Lei, B., 
2020a. Driver fatigue transition prediction in highly automated driving using 
physiological features. Expert Syst. Appl. 113204. 
Zhou, F., Yang, X.J., Zhang, X., 2020b. Takeover transition in autonomous vehicles: a 
youtube study. Int. J. Hum.Comput. Interact. 36 (3), 295–306. 
N. Du et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       


