Pedestrian road-crossing willingness as a function of vehicle
automation, external appearance, and driving behaviour
Debargha Dey ⇑, Marieke Martens, Berry Eggen, Jacques Terken
Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, the Netherlands
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 20 September 2018
Received in revised form 23 July 2019
Accepted 30 July 2019
Keywords:
Automated vehicle
Autonomous vehicle
Pedestrian interaction
Vulnerable road users
Behaviour
Appearance
a b s t r a c t
This paper discusses whether the knowledge of the driving mode of an approaching vehicle
(manual vs. automated) inﬂuences pedestrians’ decisions while crossing a street.
Additionally, the paper explores how different appearances and driving behaviours of vehi-
cles interact with driving mode in affecting pedestrians’ road-crossing behaviours. In a
video-based experiment with sixty participants, two vehicles with different appearances
(a BMW 3 and a Renault Twizy) were presented as either manually-driven or automated
vehicles. Both vehicles displayed either yielding or non-yielding behaviour on a straight
road devoid of other trafﬁc. Participants were asked to indicate whether they would cross
the street in front of the approaching vehicle, at different distances ranging from 45 m to
1.5 m. The results showed that there was no signiﬁcant inﬂuence of the knowledge of
the driving mode (manually-driven vs automated) on pedestrians’ willingness to cross
the street at any distance. The vehicle’s behaviour (whether it is maintaining speed or
yielding) played a dominant role in pedestrians’ decision to cross a road, and this was sim-
ilar for both modes and both vehicles, at all distances. However, results suggested that in si-
tuations and at distances when the intent of the vehicle was not fully clear by the
behaviour of the car alone, there were differences between the two vehicles at certain dis-
tances, which could be attributed to the differences in their appearance such as size,
aggressiveness and novelty. A futuristic-looking vehicle inspired less conﬁdence in road-
crossing situations compared to an ordinary-looking vehicle. Additionally, a novel and
futuristic-looking vehicle appeared to make it easier for people to believe that it is an auto-
mated vehicle. We conclude by discussing design implications for the development of
external HMIs automated vehicles.
 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Rapid changes in automotive technology are resulting in drastic changes in the driving task, by which the decisions and
control over what the vehicle does are increasingly shifted from the driver to the system. Much attention is already being
devoted to what this means for the driver, in terms of trust, transparency, and how the interface can be adjusted to support-
ing non-driving-related tasks (Kun, 2018). Recently, research and development in academia and industry has also started to
give attention to the question of what vehicle automation means for the interaction with other road users (Lundgren et al.,
2016; Merat, Louw, Madigan, Wilbrink, & Schieben, 2018; Mirnig, Perterer, Stollnberger, & Tscheligi, 2017). There have been
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2019.07.027
1369-8478/ 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
⇑Corresponding author.
E-mail address: d.dey@tue.nl (D. Dey).
Transportation Research Part F 65 (2019) 191–205
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Transportation Research Part F
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/trf


numerous studies and reports which highlight the general lack of trust and acceptance of automated vehicles among people.
Bazilinskyy, Kyriakidis, and De Winter (2015) found from their crowdsourcing study that opinions on trust concerning auto-
mated vehicles were vastly divided, while other reports showed that people are generally not receptive to the idea of auto-
mated driving, and are cautious and hesitant to the idea of sharing road spaces with driverless vehicles (Hutson, 2017;
Nordhoff, De Winter, Kyriakidis, Van Arem, & Happee, 2018; Smith & Anderson, 2017). Recently, Hulse, Xie, and Galea
(2018) found that automated cars were perceived as a ‘‘somewhat low risk” form of transport. Another interview study of
pedestrians who had interacted with Uber automated vehicles found that an ‘innocent until proven guilty’ mentality is
prevalent with respect to automated vehicles and trust (Reig, Norman, Morales, Das, Steinfeld, & Forlizzi, 2018). However,
the authors also note that there was a sizeable number of participants yet to be convinced: the belief that automated driving
technology is not yet mature, or a general lack of knowledge about what automated driving technology is, lead to mistrust in
several participants. People also associated automated vehicles with artiﬁcial intelligence (AI), and both are perceived by
some to be detrimental to society. This was particularly observed in the incidents involving vandalism and harassment of
Waymo automated vehicles in Arizona amidst the general mistrust towards automated vehicles (Kautonen, 2019;
Romero, 2018). Given these split opinions, an interesting question is how pedestrians will behave in the interaction with
automated vehicles as compared to manually driven vehicles in the context of a speciﬁc task such as crossing a street in view
of an approaching vehicle.
When pedestrians want to cross the street while a vehicle is approaching, they need to decide whether to cross the street
in front of the approaching vehicle or wait until it has passed. When the vehicle in question is being driven in an automated
manner, the question arises whether the perceptions that factor into a pedestrian’s decision-making differ from when inter-
acting with a manually-driven vehicle. Given the novelty of automated driving and automated vehicles not being main-
stream, we anticipate a certain hesitation around automated vehicles born out of lack of trust or familiarity.
A few studies conducted in this direction show some preliminary results. Rothenbücher, Li, Sirkin, Mok, and Ju (2016)
tested their ‘‘ghost driver” platform by hiding a human driver inside a seat suit in a car labelled as an automated vehicle.
At pedestrian crossings and roundabouts, they found that the Wizard-of-Oz automated vehicle did not alter the interactions
and road-crossing behaviour of pedestrians as long as the vehicle did not behave in an unpredictable manner. Furthermore, a
study conducted by Rodríguez Palmeiro et al. (2018) reported similar results: when pedestrians interacted with Wizard-of-
Oz automated vehicles where drivers were distracted by other activities or when a car was clearly marked as self-driving,
pedestrians’ willingness to cross did not change. However, since the manipulations in these studies were done by addition
of stickers to passenger cars that were otherwise normal in appearance, the question arises whether the participants read the
stickers or achieved enough immersion in the studies.
Furthermore, apart from pedestrian-related factors such as mobility, assertiveness, culture, and possibly the context
(being in a hurry or not, as well as location on the road), vehicle-related factors, both behavioural (distance, speed and accel-
eration) and appearance (size, colour, and styling as inﬂuenced by outer looks that hint at the vehicle’s sociability and power)
play a role in pedestrians’ crossing decisions (Klatt, Chesham, & Lobmaier, 2016; Windhager et al., 2008, 2012). Speciﬁcally,
the appearance of a vehicle can lend itself to stereotypes about the kind of people who own them, and their driving beha-
viour (Davies & Patel, 2005; Davies, 2009). Studies have shown that in the case of manually-driven vehicles, this, in turn, may
affect pedestrians’ crossing behaviours in front of cars (Klatt et al., 2016). In case of manually-driven vehicles, the appearance
of a vehicle can also lend itself to stereotypes about the kind of people who own them, and their driving behaviour (Davies &
Patel, 2005; Davies, 2009). This, in turn, affects pedestrians’ crossing behaviours in front of cars (Klatt et al., 2016). A pedes-
trian may look at a vehicle and instantly make assumptions about the vehicle’s behaviour based on a complex combination
of vehicle and driver characteristics, in terms of its assertiveness, potential to yield, etc., and consequently determine how to
interact with it. Contrarily, given that an automated vehicle is driven by computer algorithms and not a human driver, the
question arises whether vehicle appearance at all matters in the context of pedestrian interactions with it, since stereotypes
may not apply to a robotic system as it does to humans. It is thus also interesting to investigate how signiﬁcantly different
appearances and driving behaviours of vehicles interact with the driving mode of the vehicle.
From these considerations, we derive the following main hypotheses:
H1. The perceived driving mode of the vehicle (manual vs automated) affects the willingness of pedestrians to cross the
street in favour of a manually-driven car – pedestrians may be more hesitant to cross around an automated vehicle at the
same distance due to a novelty effect, lack of trust, or other factors.
H2. The driving behaviour of the vehicle affects the willingness of pedestrians to cross the street in favour of a vehicle
demonstrating yielding behaviour, all other factors remaining constant.
H3. The effect of the appearance of a vehicle will depend on its automation status:
H3a. The appearance of a manually-driven vehicle will affect the road-crossing willingness of pedestrians in favour of
a smaller, friendlier appearance, all other factors remaining constant.
H3b. The appearance of automated vehicles will not have a signiﬁcant effect on the road-crossing willingness of pedes-
trians, all other factors remaining constant.
The hypotheses were evaluated in a study deploying video clips of approaching vehicles. While a video-based study takes
away the dynamics of the interaction between the pedestrian and the vehicle, it ensures for solid experimental control. Fur-
thermore, it has been shown that time arrival estimates do not differ between video clips and real-life situations (Recarte,
192
D. Dey et al. / Transportation Research Part F 65 (2019) 191–205


Conchillo, & Nunes, 2005), which justiﬁed that a video-based study in this context preserves the ecological validity of the
insights.
2. Method
2.1. Selection of vehicles
The scope of the experiment was limited to the interaction between vehicles and pedestrians (and not cyclists or non-
automated, human-driven vehicles), in which we measured a pedestrian’s willingness to cross the road in the presence of
the approaching vehicle, whether automated or manually driven. Besides quantitative data, the experiment also aimed to
get qualitative insights on people’s reaction and behaviour to an automated vehicle in contrast to a manually-driven vehicle.
The main manipulation was through instructions to participants: they were told that the approaching vehicle was either an
automated vehicle or a manually-driven vehicle.
The project which this study is a part of focuses on creating an automated vehicle and using it to study different aspects of
vehicle automation, including technological and human factors issues. The carrier for the project is a Renault Twizy. A
Renault Twizy has a rather extraordinary appearance, and, by virtue of its appearance, may already interfere with the mental
models of pedestrians and cause some uncertainty in road-crossing situations. Therefore, a second car had to be chosen that
opposed the appearance-related characteristics of the Twizy for inclusion in the experiment, so that the results of diamet-
rically opposite dimensions within vehicles’ appearances can be compared, and their interactions with vehicle driving beha-
viour and driving mode studied.
In order to assess how the Renault Twizy was perceived, and how it compared to other vehicles regarding its ‘‘sociability”
and ‘‘power” as explained in the work of Windhager et al. (2008, 2012), a few other commonly available vehicles were cho-
sen that varied across these dimensions. Thus, an inventory of 8 different vehicles was created based on parameters such as
corners of windshield, extremes of headlight position, dimensions of grill (Windhager et al., 2008) regarding cars that we
believed represented different degrees of sociability and power, as well as novelty of appearance (BMW 3 series F30, Google
self-driving car, Nissan 370z, Renault Twizy, Toyota Prius XW30, Volkswagen Beetle A5, Volkswagen Golf MK6, and Volkswa-
gen Golf MK7). We sought conﬁrmation of our impressions of the perceptions of the sociability and power, and additionally,
the novelty and futuristic-ness of the vehicles’ appearance through a survey. Images of the front view of these 8 vehicles
juxtaposed with a picture of a pedestrian for scale of size were shown in a randomized order in the survey, and the respon-
dents were asked to rate the vehicles on various external-appearance-related dimensions using scales (Table 1). To explore
the perception of each of these dimensions, six scales were formulated with semantic anchors speciﬁcally chosen to repre-
sent two extremes of the three appearance-related dimensions (sociability, power, and novelty). This was done by framing
questions in a manner that oriented the participants towards the scenario of a pedestrian facing the vehicle. The responses
revealed general perception towards the different vehicles in the context of a pedestrian’s road-crossing situation in the
presence of the corresponding approaching vehicle.
In the cars shown, any visible logos on the car that identiﬁed the vehicle as a particular make or model were purposefully
and carefully hidden. This was done to achieve a general sense of anonymity about the vehicles and prevent bias based on
brand prejudice. While this would not have deterred well-seasoned car enthusiasts from recognizing the car from its general
shape and appearance, this was a general precaution applied within the practical limitations of the experiment to mitigate
any confounding inﬂuence. Furthermore, according to Davies and Patel (2005), white as a colour in cars score relatively neu-
tral in perception of aggressiveness of a vehicle. Since the objective was to elicit judgements about the cars strictly by the
design/appearance of the vehicle, variation of colour was removed to eliminate a possible confounding factor. Hence, all
the cars shown were white in colour (except for the Renault Twizy, which had white body panels and black bumpers) to
prevent further implicit prejudice based on car colour. The survey was distributed over professional and social networks
and allowed to run until at least 100 responses were received (ﬁnal sample size N = 102). We used the survey results to cal-
ibrate the appearance of the different cars in order to have an objective measure of how friendly and futuristic the vehicles
looked. The responses were collected on a 10-point scale based on perceptions of various attributes of the vehicles. Among
the vehicles evaluated in the survey, the vehicle that was rated as the most ‘‘different” in appearance-related dimensions
from the Twizy was selected, which was a BMW 3 series. Thus, the vehicles ﬁnally used for the study were:
Table 1
Mean and standard deviation of survey responses for various attributes of the selected vehicles, N = 102.
Scales
BMW 3 series (mean, sd)
Renault Twizy (mean, sd)
t(101), p
1
Cute – Aggressive (1–10)
7.31, 1.9
3.29, 2.05
13.989, <0.000
2
Submissive – Dominant (1–10)
7.85, 1.64
3.29, 1.94
17.501, <0.000
3
Friendly – Angry (1–10)
7.24, 1.89
3.72, 2.04
12.378, <0.000
4
Yielding – Assertive (1–10)
7.58, 1.62
3.78, 2.12
13.878, <0.000
5
Ordinary – Futuristic (1–10)
4.71, 1.9
7.8, 1.99
10.937, <0.000
6
Commonplace – Alternative (1–10)
4.27, 1.89
7.98, 2.11
12.744, <0.000
D. Dey et al. / Transportation Research Part F 65 (2019) 191–205
193


 Vehicle V1 – BMW 3 series: Representative of a commonplace and ordinary, but aggressive and angry-faced vehicle.
 Vehicle V2 – Renault Twizy: Representative of a futuristic and alternative, but cute and friendly-faced vehicle.
The mean and standard deviation of the responses in the survey for the selected cars are summarized in Table 1.
2.2. Video-based experiment
2.2.1. Task
At its simplest, the core task in this experiment was for a participant assuming the role of a pedestrian to watch a number
of randomized video segments of an approaching vehicle on an unmarked, otherwise-empty road when the vehicle was at
predetermined distances away from them, and indicate their willingness to cross the road at speciﬁc moments.
2.2.2. Materials
Recognizing the difﬁculty in controlling the parameters of the moving car and the timing of the pedestrian’s decision, the
experiment was carried out as a video-based study instead of in the ﬁeld. Videos were captured where the two vehicles
exhibited two different behaviours, and showed two different driving modes, as explained below.
 Behaviour B1: Steady driving at a speed of 50 km/h
This behaviour is an indication that the car is going at a constant speed and does not intend to slow down or yield. This
is representative of a non-yielding behaviour.
 Behaviour B2: Deceleration from 50 km/h to a full stop in front of the pedestrian
This behaviour indicates that the car has spotted the pedestrian and is intentionally stopping. The braking was gentle
and purposeful (deceleration rate of 1.8 m/s2, braking started 54 m away from the pedestrian). This is representative of
yielding behaviour.
To enhance the effect of the primary manipulation, by which participants were told that the vehicle they saw was either
manually driven or automated, each vehicle was also manipulated in a manner to enhance the illusion that they were in one
of two driving modes (see Fig. 1):
 Driving mode D1: Manual driving – the car is operated manually by a clearly visible human driver.
 Driving mode D2: Automated driving – the car is driving autonomously in the absence of a clearly visible human operator.
The automated driving mode was created through equipping the vehicles with a Wizard of Oz prototype, applying the
Ghost Driver approach (Rothenbücher et al., 2016). In this approach, the driver wears a ‘‘seat suit” while driving the vehicle,
giving the appearance from the outside that the vehicle has no driver in it. Apart from this, there were no other markings or
stickers on the vehicle to call it out as an experimental vehicle. Furthermore, there were no additional sensors on the vehicle
that would call attention to it as an automated vehicle, other than the fact that it appeared that the car was driving itself
without anyone being present inside the vehicle. To further distinguish the manual driving mode from the automated
Fig. 1. The Ghost Driver prototype - a ‘‘seat suit” was developed for the driver to give the illusion that the vehicle is driving in an automated manner. The
vehicle, with and without the seat costume, emulating an automated and manually-driven vehicle respectively, are shown.
194
D. Dey et al. / Transportation Research Part F 65 (2019) 191–205


one, in the former scenario, the driver wore a high visibility jacket. This made it more easily apparent from outside the vehi-
cle that the vehicle had a human driver. In the other case, the black seat suit, combined with the black interior of the vehicles
made the vehicle appear convincingly from outside that it was driving in an automated manner (Fig. 1).
Once the vehicles were equipped with the testing platform, each test vehicle was driven on a straight, otherwise empty
road in the university campus. Videos of the approaching car were captured from the perspective of a pedestrian situated on
the side of the road (but not at a pedestrian crossing), who has a full view of the road and the vehicle. The camera was
mounted on a tripod at eye-level for an average pedestrian (eye height approximately 160 cm). The capturing of the video
was started with the vehicles being 100 m away from the pedestrian.
The rationale behind choosing a point on a road in the university campus without a pedestrian crossing was that such
crossing behaviour in presence of vehicles is extremely common in this context. Additionally, in The Netherlands – the coun-
try where this experiment was conducted, crossing a road in the absence of a pedestrian crossing is not prohibited, nor is the
vehicle obliged to give right of way. Pedestrians are simply advised to use caution and discretion while crossing. This setup
thus allows for testing the perception of the intention of the approaching test vehicle in this open and ﬂexible environment
and context. The pedestrian-perspective view used in the video is shown in Fig. 2.
Eight video footages (2 behaviours from 2 cars with 2 driving modes each) were recorded, as shown in Table 2 below.
The willingness of the pedestrians to cross the road in front of the approaching vehicle was measured at 5 speciﬁc points
of distances from the pedestrian, the distances being 45 m, 30 m, 15 m, 5 m, and 1.5 m from the pedestrian. Each of the 8
videos of the approaching car was clipped at speciﬁc timestamps corresponding to when the vehicle was at these 5 measur-
ing points, which yielded 40 small video segments (8  5) as the stimuli for the experiment. Each video segment stimulus
thus showed the approaching car with the video starting by showing the vehicle approaching from 100 m away, and until the
point the video was clipped with the vehicle at the measuring point. The video segments were between 4 and 13 s long,
allowing participants to form an opinion of the external-appearance-related characteristics and driving behaviour of the
vehicle. The relative positions of the pedestrian (camera placement) and the corresponding distances of the 5 measuring
points are shown in Fig. 3.
2.2.3. Participants
The experiment was conducted as a between-subjects study between the two driving modes, with 30 participants per
condition (M1 through M30 for manually-driven mode, and A1 through A30 for the automated mode). To minimize variabil-
ity, the target demographic was ﬁxed on people who had normal agility/mobility (as this might affect their decision to cross
the road at a given time). Sixty participants between 20 and 55 years in age were recruited for the experiment (mean = 27.6,
standard deviation = 6.53). Each participant had either normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Care was taken that the par-
ticipants recruited were among the students and staff of the university (from an internal participant database) and were
familiar with the setting. Since the setting chosen was one without a pedestrian crossing where an approaching car does
not necessarily have to yield to a pedestrian, it was important to ensure that the participants had the same knowledge of
the area and familiarity with the customary practice of accepting an invitation to cross the road when an approaching vehicle
yields the right-of-way.
Only people who did not have experience with automated driving systems were chosen to participate in the automated
driving condition. The participants were asked beforehand whether they were involved in any way with work or research in
the domain of automated vehicles, or if they had ever interacted with a car with self-driving or advanced automation capa-
bilities. Only if they answered ‘‘no” to these questions, they were considered eligible to participate in the condition with the
automated driving mode. Otherwise, they participated in the manual mode. This was done to get an even assessment of peo-
ple’s interaction with automated vehicle speciﬁcally from people who had no background or previous experience with such
vehicles.
2.2.4. Procedure
In each experiment condition, the participant was informed in advance that they will be providing their feedback regard-
ing crossing an unmarked road in the presence of an approaching vehicle. Additionally, the participants were not informed
Fig. 2. Screenshots of video stimuli of approaching cars from a pedestrian’s perspective as used in the experiment.
D. Dey et al. / Transportation Research Part F 65 (2019) 191–205
195


whether or not the vehicles were equipped with emergency-braking system in order to deter reckless behaviour. After sign-
ing an informed consent form, the participant was asked to sit in front of a 2900 widescreen monitor as the video of the
approaching car from the pedestrian point-of-view was played full-screen to them. The participants were instructed to imag-
ine that they were standing at the edge of an unmarked road with the intention to cross the road. In the experiment condi-
tion involving the Driving mode D2 (automated driving), the participants were explicitly informed in advance that the cars
they would be encountering in the video are automated vehicles: that the vehicle drove itself, and that there was no human
driver controlling it. No participant who participated in the automated driving condition was given any additional informa-
tion about the safety of the vehicle. Before starting the actual experiment, the participant was asked to practice with 5 ran-
dom stimuli to familiarize themselves with the setup. Subsequently, each video clip corresponding to the 5 measuring points
for one particular driving condition (manual or automated driving), showing 2 cars of different appearances (BMW 3 series
or Renault Twizy), exhibiting 2 different behaviours (assertive or yielding) were presented 2 times in a randomized order to
the participant. Thus, each participant was presented with 40 stimuli (5  2  2  2). The order of the presentation of the
stimuli was randomized to counterbalance any learning effects. After each video segment completed playing, the partici-
pants were requested to express their willingness to cross the road at the moment the video had stopped playing on a 5-
point Likert scale, with 1 being no willingness and 5 being total willingness by pressing the corresponding key (1–5) on a
keyboard.
The willingness to cross the road was chosen as the single measure in this study as is a suitable substitute measure of the
feeling of safety or trust of a pedestrian in crossing the road (Walker, Dey, Martens, Pﬂeging, Eggen, & Terken, 2019). A pedes-
trian will likely not cross a road if they do not feel safe and have enough conﬁdence that a vehicle will stop for them.
After the experiment, the participants were asked to answer a few questions regarding themselves, and their experience
during the experiment. A validated assertiveness questionnaire was applied to gauge the participants’ personality and their
overall assertiveness, with the conjecture that an individual who is assertive in general might also demonstrate an assertive
attitude while crossing a road as a pedestrian. For this purpose, the 30-item schedule for assessing assertive behaviour
Table 2
The combination of video footages used to compare the vehicles, behaviours, and driving modes. In Manual Driving, the driver
wearing a high-visibility jacket was clearly visible inside the car. In (unsupervised) Automated Driving, the Ghost driver platform
was used, and participants were explicitly instructed that they will encounter an AV.
Vehicle
Behaviour
Driving Mode
V1: BMW 3 series
Commonplace and ordinary-looking
B1: Non-yielding
D1: Manual driving
D2: Automated driving
B2: Yielding
D1: Manual driving
D2: Automated driving
V2: Renault Twizy
Futuristic and alternative-looking
B1: Non-yielding
D1: Manual driving
D2: Automated driving
B2: Yielding
D1: Manual driving
D2: Automated driving
Fig. 3. Relative positions of pedestrian and measuring points.
196
D. Dey et al. / Transportation Research Part F 65 (2019) 191–205


(Rathus, 1973) was adapted and augmented with a few related questions regarding behaviour in trafﬁc situations to contex-
tualize the responses. Additionally, a small semi-structured interview was conducted where the participants were asked
questions about their general opinion about automated vehicles. In the experiment condition involving manually-driven
vehicles, they were asked to speculate if and how they would expect their responses to change if the vehicle in question
was automated. In the experiment condition involving automated vehicles, they were asked to reﬂect how the knowledge
that the vehicle is automated affected their decision to cross the road. The entire process including the instruction, the exper-
iment, and the post-experiment interview ran for a total duration of 30–35 min. Each participant was compensated for their
time with a €5 gift card.
3. Results
3.1. Quantitative
The experiment dealt with 3 different independent variables across two groups of participants in a mixed design: vehicle
appearance (BMW 3 Series, Renault Twizy), vehicle behaviour (non-yielding, yielding) as within-subjects manipulations, and
vehicle driving mode (manual, automated) as a between-subjects manipulation. The dependent variable was the willingness
of a pedestrian to cross the road in the presence of the oncoming vehicle. An inspection of descriptive statistics showed that
the behaviour of an approaching vehicle had a profound effect in pedestrian willingness to cross in front of it. The mean
scores of pedestrian willingness to cross in Table 3, and the graphs in Fig. 4 show the impact of the three different aspects
of the vehicle (appearance, behaviour, and driving condition) on the pedestrian willingness to cross, at different distances.
It is observed that the general pattern of pedestrians’ willingness to cross does not change substantially between the two
different vehicles (BMW 3 series vs. Renault Twizy), or between the two different driving modes (manual vs. automated), but
rather conforms based on the behaviour of the vehicles. In the case of a vehicle exhibiting non-yielding driving behaviour,
the willingness to cross the road diminishes steadily as the vehicle comes closer, which is an expected response. When a
vehicle exhibits yielding behaviour, the willingness of the pedestrians to cross diminishes as the vehicle comes closer until
a certain point. When the vehicle is close enough that the pedestrian can be relatively sure that the car is stopping, or when
the car has come to a complete stop, the willingness to cross increases again.
Analyses of variances (Mixed ANOVA) were conducted for each measuring point (45 m, 30 m, 15 m, 5 m, and 1.5 m), with
behaviour and vehicle appearance as within-subjects factors, and driving condition as a between-subjects factor, and the
pedestrians’ willingness to cross as the dependent variable, to evaluate the main effects and the two-way interactions
and the three-way interaction between the independent variables. In each case (distance of vehicle from the pedestrian),
the assumption of sphericity (veriﬁed by Mauchly’s Sphericity Test signiﬁcance value >0.05) holds when looking at the F-
statistics. For the sake of brevity, only the main effects are reported in Tables 4 and 5, as the interactions were not signiﬁcant.
Results show a highly statistically signiﬁcant main effect of vehicle behaviour on a pedestrian’s willingness to cross at
every measuring point (Table 4). We see a clear difference in the willingness of the pedestrians to cross in front of the vehicle
as it approaches closer between the assertive and yielding behaviours. Pedestrians consistently showed a higher willingness
to cross in front of an approaching vehicle which demonstrated a yielding behaviour, when compared to one demonstrating
an assertive behaviour, which is intuitive and expected behaviour.
Table 3
Pedestrian willingness to cross across variations of vehicle driving condition, appearance, and behaviour. 1 = Totally unwilling to cross; 3 = undecided (neutral);
5 = Totally willing to cross Top: Mean score; Bottom (small italics): Standard deviation.
Vehicle
Behaviour
Driving Mode
Vehicle distance from pedestrian
45 m
30 m
15 m
5 m
1.5 m
BMW 3 series
Non-yielding
Manual
3.683
2.933
1.817
1.450
1.25
1.141
0.907
0.782
0.723
0.583
Automated
3.2
2.35
1.533
1.2
1.083
0.702
0.789
0.434
0.484
0.296
Yielding
Manual
3.733
3.617
3.467
3.617
4.567
0.935
0.962
0.964
1.142
0.907
Automated
3.667
3.633
3.75
3.733
4.667
0.735
0.798
0.998
0.989
0.592
Renault Twizy
Non-yielding
Manual
3.433
2.567
1.633
1.5
1.317
1.158
1.023
0.765
0.841
0.676
Automated
3.15
2.4
1.517
1.183
1.05
0.939
0.855
0.663
0.482
0.153
Yielding
Manual
3.85
3.45
3.167
3.383
4.533
0.984
0.864
0.874
0.971
0.850
Automated
3.683
3.1
3.2
3.717
4.733
0.759
0.904
1.087
1.023
0.521
D. Dey et al. / Transportation Research Part F 65 (2019) 191–205
197


Inspection of the descriptive statistics in Table 3 and the graphs from Fig. 4 does not show a consistent pattern of inﬂu-
ence of pedestrians’ road-crossing willingness based on the driving mode of the vehicle. Additionally, the mixed ANOVA
results (Table 4) failed to show a statistically signiﬁcant difference in pedestrian responses between the manual and auto-
mated driving conditions at any measuring point. The tests also show that the driving mode gained a very small effect size,
which further corroborates the inference that knowledge of the driving mode of the vehicle did not affect the way pedestri-
ans interacted with the vehicle.
Fig. 4. Mean scores of pedestrian willingness to cross the street (1 = Totally unwilling to cross; 3 = undecided (neutral); 5 = Totally willing to cross) in the
presence of the oncoming vehicles exhibiting different behaviours and driving modes at various distances from the pedestrian.
Table 4
Main effects of the diving mode and behaviour of a vehicle on pedestrian willingness
to cross.
Vehicle Distance
F (1, 58)
Signiﬁcance
Effect Size (g2)
Behaviour: Yielding vs. Non-yielding
45 m
20.349
<0.000
0.260
30 m
92.832
<0.000
0.615
15 m
282.638
<0.000
0.830
5 m
349.248
<0.000
0.858
1.5 m
1306.303
<0.000
0.957
Informed Driving Condition: Manual vs. Automated
45 m
1.462
0.232
0.025
30 m
2.385
0.128
0.039
15 m
0.017
0.896
<0.000
5 m
0.030
0.862
0.001
1.5 m
0.099
0.754
0.002
Table 5
Main effects of the vehicle appearance on pedestrian willingness to cross.
Vehicle Appearance: Renault Twizy vs. BMW 3 series
Vehicle Distance
F (1, 58)
Signiﬁcance
Effect Size (g2)
45 m
0.351
0.556
0.006
30 m
7.419
0.009
0.113
15 m
4.732
<0.000
0.203
5 m
0.830
0.366
0.014
1.5 m
0.116
0.735
0.002
198
D. Dey et al. / Transportation Research Part F 65 (2019) 191–205


The effects of the different vehicles are statistically signiﬁcant only within a certain range of distance from the pedestrian
(Table 5). This is seen as a marked difference in the participants’ responses at the measuring point of 30 and 15 m from the
pedestrian. This difference may be attributed to the contrasting appearances of the vehicles. In this range of distance (mea-
suring points of 30 m and 15 m), pedestrians appeared more willing to cross in front of the BMW 3 series compared to the
Renault Twizy. This was observed nearly consistently in both manual and automated driving modes.
It was also investigated whether the individual assertiveness of the participants had any role to play in their willingness
to cross the street, in order to account for the role of assertiveness as a potential covariate. The assertiveness scores of each
participant (Rathus, 1973), were assessed against their responses, and the results of the Spearman’s q is shown in Table 6.
Analysis shows that in each measuring point, the assertiveness of the pedestrian had either negligible or weak correlation,
and in all but one scenario (manual driving, measuring distance of 45 m), the correlations were not statistically signiﬁcant.
As a result, it can be inferred that for practical considerations, individual assertiveness did not play an active role in deter-
mining the willingness of the pedestrian to cross, and the attributes of the vehicle were more signiﬁcant determinants of
pedestrian behaviour.
3.2. Qualitative
While quantitative data shows how people acted, it does not explain the subjective reasons behind those actions. Addi-
tionally, the way people act is often different from how people think they act, so it is still important to capture an account of
conscious rationale behind the perceptual and behavioural characteristics of a user. To this end, the qualitative data from the
post-experiment semi-structured interviews with the participants were subjected to thematic analysis and categorized. We
looked for various elements in the participant responses that alluded to factors that inﬂuenced their decisions to cross the
road in the presence of the oncoming vehicles. The themes that emerged from the analysis are discussed below and are addi-
tionally furnished with a few selected quotes by the participants which exemplify the insights.
3.2.1. Behaviour of the vehicle is the most critical determinant of willingness to cross
When asked the open-ended question of what factors inﬂuenced their willingness to cross the road in front of the
approaching vehicle in the experiment, every participant stated that the distance of the car played the most crucial role
while deciding to cross the road. This is an expected response: if the car is still far away, pedestrians will simply cross
the road. However, the situation becomes increasingly ambiguous as the car comes closer. The participant responses were
also unanimous across both driving modes (manual vs. automated) that apart from the distance, the vehicle speed and beha-
viour played a primary role in determining their willingness to cross the road. The movement patterns of the car (whether
the car seemed to be slowing down, or continuing to drive at speed) impacted their decision-making process, as revealed in
the following relevant participant quotes:
[M4]: ‘‘I ﬁrst focused on the speed at which the car is approaching. If I feel that the speed is reducing and it is coming to a stop, I
decided to cross the road, otherwise not. The speed, acceleration, and deceleration were important. In the videos, I wasn’t able to
see the driver very well. But in real-life scenarios, at whatever speed the car is approaching, if I am able to see the driver and
establish eye contact, I will cross the road. But that is a secondary conﬁrmation. The primary factor is the speed and the beha-
viour of the vehicle. If I am conﬁdent that the speed is decreasing, I will cross the road.”
[M22]: ‘‘I was looking at the speed of the car and how far it is from me. If the car is too far away, I would just cross and I don’t
even need to look at the speed.”
[A2]: If the car stops before me, I will cross, otherwise I will be reluctant. I don’t trust the car while it is still in motion. If the car is
far away, I look at the speed of the car. Even if the car is far away, if the car is driving quickly, I will just wait.
[A28]: ‘‘When the car came across the ﬁrst time, I looked inside and saw that there was no one driving the car. Since then, I
realized that ‘‘oh, I don’t need to look for the driver if they see me or not”, so I was just looking at the speed of the car”.
3.2.2. Size matters: the perceived importance of vehicle size in the crossing decision
When the participants were asked if the difference in the cars they encountered had any effect on their crossing decisions,
the majority responded that the appearance of the car did play a role in their decisions. Within this group of participants, a
majority in both driving modes highlighted the size of the vehicle as being a factor in making a decision. The observable size
Table 6
Spearman’s correlation coefﬁcient between participant assertiveness and their willingness
to cross.
Manual
Automated
45 m
q = 0.171, p = 0.031
q = 0.096, p = 0.147
30 m
q = 0.010, p = 0.457
q = 0.109, p = 0.118
15 m
q = 0.055, p = 0.274
q = 0.009, p = 0.462
5 m
q = 0.103, p = 0.132
q = 0.005, p = 0.478
1.5 m
q = 0.069, p = 0.228
q = 0.017, p = 0.425
D. Dey et al. / Transportation Research Part F 65 (2019) 191–205
199


difference between the Renault Twizy and the BMW 3 Series, played a conscious role for most people, and they rationalized
that with a smaller car, they can cross and get out of the car’s way more quickly, so they were more likely to cross in front of a
small car compared to a big car. Alternatively, in the worst case if they get hit by the car, a smaller car would cause less dam-
age. There was a clearly higher perceived risk in interacting with larger vehicles. The subjective consideration of vehicle size
is evidenced by some of the representative participant quotes below:
[A1]: ‘‘I was thinking about the looks of the car. I think that when I saw the bigger car, I inherently responded with a little more
caution. I feel like ‘I see a bigger car, I need to be more careful’. I feel that the bigger car has more respect (presence) on the road.
At the same speed, I would feel more afraid to cross in front of the bigger car.”
[A3]: ‘‘I felt more scared around the bigger car. I felt that the bigger car was driving faster than the smaller car. Also, if the car is
small, I can avoid it by moving quickly.”
[M3]: ‘‘If the car is large, I think it would take a longer time to slow down, so I feel more threatened by it, even if it is farther
away. I also feel that if the smaller car hits me, maybe I’ll get a bruise, but if the bigger car hits me, I’ll probably be dead.”
[M26]: ‘‘I know that theoretically, the difference in the vehicles shouldn’t matter. But the fact that the BMW was a bigger car
made me want to keep a safer distance from it when compared to the other car. I was being more cautious around the BMW.”
However, it is interesting to note that this contrasts the actual responses made by the participants, as found in the quan-
titative analysis. The actual willingness to cross was not affected by the perceived risk. We revisit this in the discussion.
3.2.3. Stereotypes matter: mental models and preconceived ideas about vehicles and their driving styles inﬂuence crossing decisions
Stereotypes of vehicles based on their external appearance, and subsequently, their expected behaviours did play a role in
the conscious reasoning of some participants. While these preconceived notions of various participants did not necessarily
concur with each other, or conform to the truth, they sometimes had a conscious effect on the participants. This, paired with
the quantitative results indicated that the appearance of the vehicle and associated stereotypes and prejudices might play a
role in pedestrians’ crossing decisions.
[M9]: ‘‘I feel that the Twizy is an odd vehicle. That’s not something you would encounter regularly on the road. I would consider
the BMW to be a more ‘normal’ vehicle. . . I don’t necessarily ﬁnd the Twizy cute or friendly. Moreover, if it’s going fast and it hits
you, it is still going to be a threat. But if both the vehicles are traveling at the same speed, I’d trust that the BMW would brake
better than the Twizy. . . I don’t think whether a car looks cute matters. However, it also interferes with the thought that the
Twizy being smaller is easier to avoid if I move quickly, while the BMW might still hit me because it is a wider, bigger car.
At the end of the day, it depends on how fast the car is coming, and how far they are. I was weighing those options to determine
if it was safe for me to cross.”
[A14]: . . . for the different look (speaking about the Renault Twizy), I didn’t feel conﬁdent every time as I didn’t know how to
react around it.
[A25]: ‘‘The small car (the Renault Twizy) looked more sophisticated, intelligent, and futuristic, so I thought it might stop sooner
or be better equipped with handling an emergency braking situation. So, I might be bolder to cross the road.”
[A27]: ‘‘The BMW made me more reluctant to cross. BMWs are normally driven by people who drive aggressively, and they drive
faster. I didn’t think differently because this was an automated car. I wanted to be careful.”
[A29]: ‘‘I actually found the small car a little more unpredictable because it’s a car I am not familiar with seeing. It reminds me of
a brommobiel (mini car), and the people who drive those things are in my experience more unpredictable than people driving
normal cars.”
3.2.4. Unique and futuristic looks make a car more believable as an automated vehicle
In the majority of the cases, a futuristic or unique external appearance in a vehicle did lend itself to the idea that the vehi-
cle is equipped with advanced technology and is capable of automated driving, as expected and desired in our experiment
design. In the automated driving condition, some participants indicated that it was easier for them to believe that the
Renault Twizy was an automated vehicle because it was more futuristic and ‘‘robotic-looking” [A15]. Even in the experiment
condition involving the manual driving mode, one participant [M1] commented that the uniqueness of the Renault Twizy
made them think that the vehicle was driven by a robot (thus self-driving), despite it being driven by the human driver
in a high-visibility jacket. On the other hand, the BMW was a familiar vehicle and conformed to people’s idea of an ordinary
car, so it was less obvious as a self-driving car.
[A8]: ‘‘When I saw the smaller car (the Renault Twizy), I really thought that it was a self-driving car. I don’t know why. But in my
mind, the ﬁrst impression was that the other (BMW) did not look like a self-driving car.”
[A9]: ‘‘The small car looked like it was equipped with new technology and innovation. The normal one (the BMW 3 series) – it
looked like cars with drivers in it. As it was said that they are both self-driving cars, it didn’t inﬂuence my decision to cross the
road. But if I just look at the car, the small one looked more hi-tech.”
[A15]: ‘‘The big car didn’t really look like a self-driving car. The other car was remarkably smaller than you are used to seeing. It
looked a bit more robotic; I think. A bit more mechanical than the big car.”
[A25]: ‘‘The small car looked more sophisticated, intelligent, and futuristic, so I thought it might stop sooner or be better
equipped with handling an emergency braking situation. So, I might be bolder to cross the road. I caught myself thinking that
200
D. Dey et al. / Transportation Research Part F 65 (2019) 191–205


the BMW was just an ordinary car with someone driving it, and not an automated car. The small car was more believable as an
automated car for me.”
[M1]: ‘‘The small car (Renault Twizy) looks like one that is used for experiments. I wouldn’t want to drive around in that car
because it will be difﬁcult to be seen in. As the car looked a little strange, I didn’t know its behaviour and I couldn’t predict
how it was going to slow down or stop. For the bigger car (the BMW 3 series) – I have seen such cars around and I know what
to expect. But with the small car, I couldn’t be sure. Somehow, it felt that instead of a person, there was a robot inside the car
because in my mind I associated the car with experimental prototypes. That’s also why I wasn’t entirely sure if the car would
really stop for me”
3.2.5. Explicit knowledge of the self-driving nature of a vehicle has little impact on crossing behaviour
As a response to whether the knowledge of the vehicle being automated consciously affected their decision, a few par-
ticipants reﬂected that the knowledge that a vehicle is automated would either ﬁll them with hesitation, or contrarily, con-
ﬁdence. However, a majority of the participants denied the self-driving nature of the vehicles to have had any impact on their
crossing decision.
[A1]: ‘‘If it is an automated car, I would not like to step in even if it is slowing down. But in this case, I didn’t think about it too
much. I think I tuned out of the fact that these were automated cars”.
[A8]: When I saw the smaller car (the Renault Twizy), I looked inside and saw that there was no driver inside. Then I realized
that it was a more hi-tech self-driving car, and it made me feel more conﬁdent around it. (This participant also said that the
BMW did not look like a self-driving car in their opinion – see quote above).
[A2]: I imagined myself in a world where automated cars have been tested and approved to be on the road, so they must be safe.
I didn’t think I acted any differently as opposed to a normal (manually-driven) car.
[A12]: I was just basing my decision on the speed and distance of the cars, so I don’t think that the fact that they were self-
driving mattered.
Subjective opinion was split regarding the perceived safety of automated vehicles. However, the actual road-crossing
willingness was not affected by individual differences in regards to perception towards automated vehicles, as seen from
the quantitative analysis: the unaided knowledge of the driving mode did not cause a signiﬁcant departure in the pedestrian
willingness to cross. This strongly points to the inference that simply introducing a reference frame that a vehicle is auto-
mated does not adversely impact pedestrians’ attitude towards such vehicles.
4. Discussion
In this experiment, the effects of a vehicle’s driving mode (automated vs manual), external appearance, and driving beha-
viour (yielding vs not yielding) on the willingness of pedestrians to cross a road in its path were studied. The primary aim
was to identify whether pedestrians behave differently with automated vehicles as compared to manually-driven vehicles.
4.1. Driving mode
No evidence was found that the knowledge whether a car is self-driving or manually-driven inﬂuences pedestrian inter-
actions with the vehicle. Evidence from the post-experiment interviews is in alignment with this insight. Based on this, we
reject our hypothesis H1 (The perceived driving mode of the vehicle: manual vs automated, affects the willingness of pedestrians
to cross the street). This ﬁnding conﬁrms the outcomes of an earlier study reported in the literature (Rodríguez Palmeiro et al.,
2018), and suggests that people are not more uncertain about whether to cross in front of an automated vehicle, or – on the
contrary – have more trust that an automated vehicle will halt.
4.2. Vehicle driving behaviour
On the other hand, the results showed that overall, the behaviour and driving dynamics of the vehicle play a signiﬁcant
role in implicitly communicating the intent of the vehicle to pedestrians. When a vehicle exhibited non-yielding driving
behaviour, the response was unsurprisingly and consistently a decrease in the pedestrians’ willingness to cross as the vehicle
came closer. In contrast, when the vehicle exhibited yielding behaviour, it was observed that the pedestrians’ willingness
dropped as the car came closer until a certain point, and then the willingness increased again. This is explained by the fact
that when the vehicle is far away, the distance of the vehicle inspires enough conﬁdence for the pedestrian to cross. As the
vehicle gradually slows down when approaching the pedestrian, the situation becomes increasingly ambiguous and the
pedestrian becomes less conﬁdent that it is safe to cross. When the vehicle still gets closer and reduces speed further, the
pedestrian’s conﬁdence that the vehicle will stop and that it is safe to cross, begins to increase again. This is in alignment
with hypothesis H2 that the driving behaviour of the vehicle plays a signiﬁcant role in pedestrians’ road-crossing decisions.
The qualitative data also indicate that pedestrians rely on the vehicle’s driving dynamics and movement patterns substan-
tially to inform their road-crossing decisions.
D. Dey et al. / Transportation Research Part F 65 (2019) 191–205
201


In previous work, Zimmermann and Wettach (2017) conducted an exploratory study in which suggested that a vehicle’s
motion behaviour was able to evoke certain emotions, which in turn lead to rational decisions within the participants. The
authors argued that this can be seen as a form of mutual communication. Similar ﬁndings are observed in the research by
Risto, Emmenegger, Vinkhuyzen, Cefkin, and Hollan (2017), which show that drivers in manually-driven vehicles often
choose to exaggerate their behaviour in trafﬁc, such as stopping short, to explicitly show intention through motion patterns.
Other work has shown that braking patterns and subsequent time-to-arrival estimates can act as a basis of communication
of intent for vehicles towards pedestrians (Ackermann, Beggiato, Bluhm, & Krems, 2018; Ackermann, Beggiato, Bluhm, Löw,
& Krems, 2019; Beggiato, Witzlack, & Krems, 2017; Beggiato, Witzlack, Springer, & Krems, 2017). The ﬁndings in this study
corroborate the earlier insights: the motion patterns and driving behaviours of a vehicle have profoundly signiﬁcant effects
in communicating the vehicle’s intention, and emerges to be the biggest determinant of pedestrians’ willingness to cross,
especially when the vehicle clearly exhibits yielding and non-yielding behaviour. Further research is required to investigate
pedestrian interaction with a variety of different vehicle motion patterns to validate whether the movement behaviour of the
vehicle is a signiﬁcant contributor of pedestrian road-crossing decision in every scenario.
4.3. Effect of external appearance
The main effect of appearance showed small but statistically signiﬁcant differences at measuring points in the interme-
diate distance range (30 m, and 15 m). Research with conventional (manually-driven) vehicles has shown that the external
appearance of the vehicle reﬂects the temperament and driving style of the driver and lends itself to stereotyping (Davies &
Patel, 2005; Davies, 2009). One might assume that since automated vehicles are driven by computer algorithms and not by
people, the vehicle appearance will cease to have an effect on pedestrians’ willingness to cross a road in its presence. How-
ever, evidence from this study suggests otherwise. At the measuring points where the vehicle appearance becomes signiﬁ-
cant (30 m and 15 m), in both manual and automated driving modes, we notice that the pedestrian willingness to cross is
lower in front of the Renault Twizy compared to the BMW 3 series.
One aspect of the vehicles’ appearances that may have played a role in the pedestrians’ willingness to cross is the size
difference of the vehicles. From the qualitative results, it also emerged that pedestrians consciously felt the need to be more
cautious around a larger car compared to a smaller car. However, we observe from the quantitative data that in reality, the
opposite happens, and that pedestrians are less willing to cross in front of the Twizy compared to the BMW. This might be
explained by the size-arrival effect, which holds that smaller vehicles are perceived to be farther away than larger vehicles,
so that the estimated time to arrival for smaller vehicles is later than for larger vehicles (DeLucia, 1991, 2013; Levulis,
DeLucia, & Jupe, 2015; Smith, Flach, Dittman, & Stanard, 2001).
A second aspect may have been the vehicles’ perceived sociability. A priori, pedestrians were expected to have a lower
willingness to cross in front of the BMW 3 series, compared to the Renault Twizy, at the same distance and driving condition.
The underlying reasoning was that the BMW scored as a more aggressive, angry-looking vehicle than the comparatively cute
and friendly-looking Twizy. Existing research suggests that the exterior appearance of a vehicle, speciﬁcally, the shape of its
headlights and grills, plays a signiﬁcant role in the perception of the vehicle’s sociability and power, or friendliness vs.
aggressiveness (Landwehr, McGill, & Herrmann, 2011; Windhager et al., 2008, 2012) This, in turn, was expected to affect
pedestrians’ crossing behaviours in front of cars (Klatt et al., 2016) by lowering the willingness to cross in front of
aggressive-looking vehicles. However, as mentioned above, the results showed that pedestrians were more willing to cross
in front of the approaching BMW than the Renault Twizy.
Combined, these lead us to reject hypothesis H3a – the smaller size or friendlier appearance of a vehicle did not inspire a
higher willingness for pedestrians to cross. Furthermore, we also observe that pedestrians’ responses were similar across
both manual and automated driving modes. Thus, we reject hypothesis H3b – the vehicle appearance still played a role
for automated vehicles.
This brings us to the third dimension of the appearance of the vehicles: their novelty and uniqueness. The BMW was per-
ceived as a commonplace, ordinary-looking vehicle, as opposed to the Twizy, which was perceived as an alternative,
futuristic-looking vehicle. While the unconventional appearance (uniqueness, conspicuity, and futuristic-ness) of the Twizy
settled into the belief for many participants that the car is equipped with advanced technology and capable of automated
driving (as evidenced by the participant interviews discussed in the qualitative analysis), the results suggest that subcon-
sciously, the peculiarity and the unfamiliarity of the appearance of the Renault Twizy may have adversely affected the par-
ticipants’ trust in its technical capabilities. People felt more conﬁdent in determining the behaviour of the more familiar,
albeit aggressive-looking BMW that was more believable as an ordinary, manually-driven vehicle.
4.4. Vehicle appearance as an indicator of self-driving capability
An interesting aspect of the general propensity of people to consider the BMW 3 series as an ordinary car, and contrarily,
the Renault Twizy as a more believable automated vehicle, is the fact that this behaviour transpired despite the participants
having explicitly been informed of the vehicles’ automated nature in the experiment instructions. We infer that when a car is
commonplace in looks, and does not have markers or external artefacts that explicitly draw attention to its automated driv-
ing capabilities (e.g. stickers proclaiming that it is an automated vehicle, or sensors clearly visible on the vehicle that mark
the car out as a departure from the norm), people may lose a conscious cognizance of the fact that the car is self-driving, and
202
D. Dey et al. / Transportation Research Part F 65 (2019) 191–205


regard it as any other normal, human-driven vehicle. The question arises whether the outcome would have been different if
the ‘‘ordinary” vehicle in the experiment (BMW) was marked or equipped with sensors in a manner that called attention to
its self-driving nature.
In a prior study on the perceptions of an automated shuttle to be used for public transport, Schieben, Wilbrink, Madigan,
Louw, and Merat (2018) conducted face-to-face interviews, an onsite-survey and two focus groups resulting in several
design considerations. In the context of the perception of a vehicle as having automated driving capabilities, their partici-
pants pointed out that it is important for the design of the vehicle to look unlike normal public transport systems to be
clearly identiﬁed as an automated vehicle. Their ﬁndings suggested that being able to identify the shuttle as an automated
vehicle helps to build up the right expectations on the behaviour and next manoeuvres of the vehicle. However, taking into
account the evidence from our study, we question whether vastly different exterior designs in vehicles is a good in all cir-
cumstances. Rather than helping pedestrians to build the right expectations, a futuristic exterior may make them actually
less conﬁdent about how the vehicle will behave.
4.5. Implications
The biggest takeaway of this study is that all other factors remaining constant, pedestrians do not experience a signiﬁcant
change in their willingness to cross in front of an automated vehicle as opposed to a manual vehicle. The external appearance
of the vehicle has a small modulating effect on willingness to cross. A futuristic appearance seemingly reinforces the instruc-
tion to the participants that a vehicle is automated.
Our results show an impact of vehicles’ external appearances on pedestrians’ perception of a vehicle as automated, and
their willingness to cross a road. The patterns that emerge out of this data – particularly regarding the novelty and futuris-
ticness of a vehicle’s appearance – lay the foundations of further research investigating the effect of vehicle appearance in
more scenarios for automated vehicle deployment. These lead to a major design insight. Given that car manufacturers are
already choosing to follow different schools of thought in the matter of how the design of an automated vehicle can play
a role in conveying the subtle messages behind a car’s personality, capability, and power, this research informs the commu-
nity of future design decisions. Volvo has chosen to make their ﬁrst test automated vehicles look inconspicuous and like any
other ordinary vehicle, to address the concern of invoking abusive or bullying behaviour from other road users – the knowl-
edge that a vehicle is automated by its special appearance, coupled with the assumption that it is programmed for defensive
behaviour might embolden pedestrians to take advantage of it by stepping in its front even in the absence of the right of way
without any fear of consequences (Connor, 2016). In contrast, the Google self-driving car was purposefully designed to look
cute and friendly in order to help pedestrians regard it as a harmless entity, as well as impart the sense that it is not a high-
speed vehicle (D’Onfro, 2014; Korosec, 2016). Other car manufacturers employ special design techniques to help their con-
cept vehicles stand out. Faraday Future, for instance, calls out its vehicle FF91’s design and draws attention to its futuristic
features (Faraday Future, 2016). This research suggests that an overly odd and unfamiliar exterior design of vehicles might
interfere with the cognitive models of pedestrians and make them more hesitant in a road-crossing context, at least until the
novelty wears off. Especially in the early stages of introduction of automated vehicles, in order to ensure a smooth introduction
and integration into society, it might be important to not make automated vehicles too conspicuous by design.
Furthermore, we found evidence that the behaviour and movement patterns of a car play the most important role in
determining pedestrian crossing behaviour. The impact of their outer appearance is not trivial, but less substantial in com-
parison. This points towards the design implication that ways to augment the implicit communication that takes place
through the movement patterns of a vehicle should be explored for the most effective method to communicate vehicle
intent. The most intuitive way to express the intention of a vehicle is through behaviour and movement. Augmenting the
vehicle’s natural behaviour may be a more effective way to demonstrate vehicle intent than augmenting vehicle appearance
using lights, messages, and projections. Communication via deliberate exaggeration of movement patterns is perhaps a bet-
ter communicator of intent, and more research needs to be conducted on how this can be accomplished.
4.6. Limitations and future work
One consideration of the study is that we manipulated the belief of our participants regarding the self-driving nature of
the car in the autonomous driving condition by instruction in the automated driving condition. We did not do an explicit
manipulation check to validate whether the belief was affected. In the semi-structured interview after the study, participants
were asked how their road-crossing willingness was affected as a result of the vehicles’ automated nature. Although no par-
ticipants mentioned doubting the automation status of the vehicle, we cannot be certain how well the manipulation worked
for each participant.
Another limitation of this study was the video-based nature of the experiment as opposed to a real-world ﬁeld investi-
gation. Due to the lack of the immediate danger of physical harm, participants might have given responses that would have
entailed riskier behaviour than they would actually display in real life scenarios. Also, the video-based nature of the exper-
iment limits the dynamic situation of road-crossing behaviour in real life, where the driver/vehicle also reacts to the beha-
viour of the pedestrian. However, the requirement of a high level of control in the environment and the independent
variables made it realistically impossible to conduct this study in the ﬁeld, as ensuring consistency in the driving behaviour,
environmental conditions, and other dynamic attributes are extremely difﬁcult in this context. Therefore, a deliberate judg-
D. Dey et al. / Transportation Research Part F 65 (2019) 191–205
203


ment was made to use videos as a medium for this experiment as a calculated trade-off between realism and control.
Another concern was whether the approach of the vehicle and perception of the arrival time of a vehicle in real-life holds
in a video. However, a previous study found that time arrival estimates do no differ between video and real-life situation
(Recarte et al., 2005), which retains the ecological validity of this study. Furthermore, in road-crossing situations, pedestrians
usually walk up to the edge of the road, make an immediate judgement based on the environment and the approaching car,
and decide whether or not to cross the road. Looking at an oncoming vehicle for a prolonged period of time and then indi-
cating road-crossing willingness is not natural behaviour in this context. However, it was important to study pedestrians’
interactions with oncoming vehicles over the entire approach of the vehicle as a function of the vehicle’s distance. Thus, this
limitation was acknowledged within the study design as a trade-off for a longitudinal evaluation of pedestrians’ road-
crossing willingness.
Prior research points out that pedestrians’ road-crossing behaviour depends on several factors such as the structure of the
street, the driver’s reaction to the communication or time to collision (Rasouli, Kotseruba, & Tsotsos, 2017). Subsequent work
also proposed that there is a strong interrelationship between factors that inﬂuence pedestrian behaviour (Rasouli & Tsotsos,
2018). This means that only studying a small subset of these factors may not capture the true underlying reasons behind
pedestrian crossing decisions. The study was conducted in a controlled setting, on a very speciﬁc scenario that involved
the interaction of pedestrians with one car at a time, in a simple trafﬁc situation (straight road; daytime conditions; no other
trafﬁc). While the scope for the current study was chosen deliberately to study people’s reactions to automated vehicles in
regular, predictable, and non-emergency situations, the results might differ in situations involving more complex intersec-
tions, mixed trafﬁc, and unpredictable behaviours. Future work must involve investigations in more complex conditions to
validate the impact of these effects.
5. Conclusion
Within the scope of the simple and predictable trafﬁc situation in which this study was modelled, the ﬁndings in this
study indicate the patterns of pedestrian behaviour in relation to a vehicle’s perceived driving mode, external appearance,
and driving behaviour. This information can give direction to the development of automated vehicles. The results suggest
a pattern in pedestrian behaviour in relation to vehicle driving behaviours and external appearance in normal, non-
critical and non-emergency conditions. The overarching insight is that in interactions in relatively simple trafﬁc conditions,
the knowledge of the driving mode of a vehicle does not appear to impact pedestrian interaction with vehicles signiﬁcantly:
pedestrians are not overly hesitant of automated vehicles. The behavioural dynamics and movement patterns of a vehicle
play a critical role in implicitly conveying the intentions of a vehicle to pedestrians. This can be thought of as the ‘‘body lan-
guage” of a vehicle, which is the primary cue of vehicle intent in trafﬁc. This insight leads to a practical recommendation of
focusing design efforts of automated vehicle human factors in the direction of using the vehicles’ behavioural dynamics as
the foundation of a communication platform. Furthermore, we found that at a range of distance from a pedestrian when a car
is neither too far away nor close enough, the appearance of the car can play a small but signiﬁcant role in decision-making.
The results suggest that the novelty aspect of a car’s design plays a role in affecting the mental model of pedestrians and
leads them to draw conclusions regarding whether a car is automated, and this, in turn, has the potential to affect their deci-
sion to cross a road in its presence at a certain range of distance. On the other hand, we found evidence that when the exter-
nal appearances of automated vehicles correspond to people’s ideas or expectations of any ordinary, manually-driven
vehicle, people may forget that they are interacting with automated vehicles even if they are explicitly primed with this
knowledge in advance. This insight may be valuable to consider in the design of automated vehicles in the future in the nas-
cent stages of the introduction of self-driving cars when interactions between automated vehicles and vulnerable road users
may be impeded by mistrust of new technology.
Acknowledgement
This research is supported by the Dutch Domain Applied and Engineering Sciences, which is part of the Netherlands
Organisation for Scientiﬁc Research (NWO), and which is partly funded by the Ministry of Economic Affairs (project number
14896).
References
Ackermann, C., Beggiato, M., Bluhm, L.-F., & Krems, J. (2018). Vehicle movement and its potential as implicit communication signal for pedestrians and
automated
vehicles
Retrieved
from.
Proceedings
of
the
6th
humanist
conference.
Netherlands:
The
Hague
http://www.humanist-vce.
eu/ﬁleadmin/contributeurs/humanist/TheHague2018/3-Ackerman.pdf.
Ackermann, C., Beggiato, M., Bluhm, L.-F., Löw, A., & Krems, J. F. (2019). Deceleration parameters and their applicability as informal communication signal
between pedestrians and automated vehicles. Transportation Research Part F: Trafﬁc Psychology and Behaviour, 62, 757–768. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
trf.2019.03.006.
Bazilinskyy, P., Kyriakidis, M., & De Winter, J. (2015). An international crowdsourcing study into people’s statements on fully automated driving. Procedia
Manufacturing, 3(3), 2534–2542. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.540.
Beggiato, M., Witzlack, C., & Krems, J. F. (2017). Gap acceptance and time - to - arrival estimates as basis for informal communication between pedestrians
and vehicles. In AutomotiveUI ’17 ACM 9th international conference on automotive user interfaces and interactive vehicular applications (pp. 50–57). https://
doi.org/10.1145/3122986.3122995.
204
D. Dey et al. / Transportation Research Part F 65 (2019) 191–205


Beggiato, M., Witzlack, C., Springer, S., & Krems, J. (2017). The right moment for braking as informal communication signal between automated vehicles and
pedestrians in crossing situations. International conference on applied human factors and ergonomics AHFE 2017: advances in human aspects of
transportation (Vol. 597, pp. 1072–1081). . https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-60441-1.
Connor, S. (2016). First self-driving cars will be unmarked so that other drivers don’t try to bully them | Technology | The Guardian Retrieved from. The
Guardian https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/30/volvo-self-driving-car-autonomous.
D’Onfro, J. (2014). Google self-driving car: Why it’s so cute - business insider Retrieved March 9, 2017, from http://www.businessinsider.com/google-self-
driving-car-why-its-so-cute-2014-12?international=true&r=US&IR=T.
Davies, G. M. (2009). Estimating the speed of vehicles: The inﬂuence of stereotypes. Psychology, Crime & Law, 15(4), 293–312. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10683160802203971.
Davies, G. M., & Patel, D. (2005). The inﬂuence of car and driver stereotypes on attributions of vehicle speed, position on the road and culpability in a road
accident scenario. Legal and Criminological Psychology, 10, 45–62. https://doi.org/10.1348/135532504X15394.
DeLucia, P. R. (1991). Pictorial depth cues and motion-based information for depth perception Retrieved from. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 17, 738–748 https://www.researchgate.net/proﬁle/Patricia_Delucia/publication/21320770_Pictorial_and_Motion-Based_
Information_for_Depth_Perception/links/57a1461b08aeb1604832ba9d/Pictorial-and-Motion-Based-Information-for-Depth-Perception.pdf.
DeLucia, P. R. (2013). Effects of size on collision perception and implications for perceptual theory and transportation safety. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 22(3), 199–204. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721412471679.
Faraday Future (2016). Explore FF 91 - captivate Retrieved from https://www.ff.com/en/ff-91/captivate/.
Hulse, L. M., Xie, H., & Galea, E. R. (2018). Perceptions of autonomous vehicles: Relationships with road users, risk, gender and age. Safety Science, 102, 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2017.10.001.
Hutson, M. (2017). People don’t trust driverless cars. Researchers are trying to change that. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aar7402.
Kautonen, A. (2019). Waymo self-driving cars face attacks in Arizona. Retrieved March 5, 2019, from https://www.autoblog.com/2019/01/02/waymo-self-
driving-vehicle-attacks/?guccounter=1&guce_referrer=aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZ29vZ2xlLmNvbS8&guce_referrer_sig=
AQAAAN0mHXEwzuPrPgWvT07WywwfZ8z8YzEK5zEDOqL_PlXk84mcJNvqI1jpU7gE_2yKkmim59DT4Fo-nA1ZFNWUhsi4oSrtMVOCa8_y6K.
Klatt, W. K., Chesham, A., & Lobmaier, J. S. (2016). Putting up a big front: Car design and size affect road-crossing behaviour. PLoS ONE, 11(7). https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0159455.
Korosec, K. (2016). Google’s self-driving car designer YooJung Ahn Discusses Her Design | Fortune.com. Retrieved March 9, 2017, from http://fortune.com/
2016/10/12/google-yoojung-ahn-car-designer/.
Kun, A. L. (2018). Human-machine interaction for vehicles: Review and outlook. Foundations and Trends in Human-Computer Interaction, 11(4), 201–293.
Landwehr, J. R., McGill, A. L., & Herrmann, A. (2011). It’s got the look: The effect of friendly and aggressive ‘‘facial” expressions on product liking and sales.
Journal of Marketing, 75(3), 132–146. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.75.3.132.
Levulis, S. J., DeLucia, P. R., & Jupe, J. (2015). Effects of oncoming vehicle size on overtaking judgments. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 82, 163–170. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2015.05.024.
Lundgren, V. M., Habibovic, A., Andersson, J., Lagström, T., Nilsson, M., Sirkka, A., ... Saluäär, D. (2016). Will there be new communication needs when
introducing automated vehicles to the urban context? In 7th international conference on applied human factors and ergonomics. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-41682-3_41.
Merat, N., Louw, T., Madigan, R., Wilbrink, M., & Schieben, A. (2018). What externally presented information do VRUs require when interacting with fully
Automated Road Transport Systems in shared space? Accident Analysis and Prevention, 0–1. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2018.03.018.
Mirnig, N., Perterer, N., Stollnberger, G., & Tscheligi, M. (2017). Three strategies for autonomous car-to-pedestrian communication. In Proceedings of the
companion of the 2017 ACM/IEEE international conference on human-robot interaction - HRI ’17 (pp. 209–210). https://doi.org/10.1145/3029798.3038402.
Nordhoff, S., De Winter, J., Kyriakidis, M., Van Arem, B., & Happee, R. (2018). Acceptance of driverless vehicles: Results from a large cross-national
questionnaire study. Journal of Advanced Transportation. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/5382192.
Rasouli, A., Kotseruba, I., & Tsotsos, J. K. (2017). Agreeing to cross: How drivers and pedestrians communicate. In IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium,
Proceedings (pp. 264–269). Redondo Beach, CA. https://doi.org/10.1109/IVS.2017.7995730.
Rasouli, A., & Tsotsos, J. K. (2018). Autonomous vehicles that interact with pedestrians: A survey of theory and practice, (May). Retrieved from http://arxiv.
org/abs/1805.11773.
Rathus, S. A. (1973). A 30-item schedule for assessing assertive behavior. Behavior Therapy, 4(3), 398–406. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0005-7894(73)80120-0.
Recarte, M. Á., Conchillo, Á., & Nunes, L. M. (2005). Estimation of arrival time in vehicle and video. Psicothema, 17(1), 112–117.
Reig, S., Norman, S., Morales, C. G., Das, S., Steinfeld, A., & Forlizzi, J. (2018). A ﬁeld study of pedestrians and autonomous vehicles. In Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications - AutomotiveUI ’18 (pp. 198–209). Toronto, Canada.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3239060.3239064.
Risto, M., Emmenegger, C., Vinkhuyzen, E., Cefkin, M., & Hollan, J. (2017). Human-vehicle interfaces: The power of vehicle movement gestures in human
road user coordination. In Driving assessment: The ninth international driving symposium on human factors in driver assessment, training and vehicle
design. Manchester Village, Vermont.
Rodríguez Palmeiro, A., van der Kint, S., Vissers, L., Farah, H., de Winter, J. C. F., & Hagenzieker, M. (2018). Interaction between pedestrians and automated
vehicles: A Wizard of Oz experiment. Transportation Research Part F: Trafﬁc Psychology and Behaviour, 58, 1005–1020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
trf.2018.07.020.
Romero, S. (2018). Wielding rocks and knives, arizonans attack self-driving cars. The New York Times. Chandler, Arizona. Retrieved from https://www.
nytimes.com/2018/12/31/us/waymo-self-driving-cars-arizona-attacks.html.
Rothenbücher, D., Li, J., Sirkin, D., Mok, B., & Ju, W. (2016). Ghost driver: A ﬁeld study investigating the interaction between pedestrians and driverless
vehicles. In 25th IEEE international symposium on robot and human interactive communication, RO-MAN 2016 (pp. 795–802). https://doi.org/10.1109/
ROMAN.2016.7745210.
Schieben, A., Wilbrink, M., Madigan, C. K. R., Louw, T., & Merat, N. (2018). Designing the interaction of automated vehicles with other trafﬁc participants: A
design framework based on human needs and expectations. Cognition, Technology & Work (August). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10111-018-0521-z.
Smith, A., & Anderson, M. (2017). Automation in Everyday Life: Americans express more worry than enthusiasm about coming developments in automation.
Retrieved September 11, 2018, from http://www.pewinternet.org/2017/10/04/automation-in-everyday-life/.
Smith, M. R. H., Flach, J. M., Dittman, S. M., & Stanard, T. (2001). Monocular optical constraints on collision control. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 27(2), 395–410. https://doi.org/10.1037//0096-1523.27.2.395.
Walker, F., Dey, D., Martens, M., Pﬂeging, B., Eggen, B., & Terken, J. (2019). Feeling-of-safety slider : A platform for measuring pedestrian comfort in ﬁeld
interactions with vehicles. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems (pp. 1–6). Glasgow, UK. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3290607.3312880.
Windhager, S., Bookstein, F. L., Grammer, K., Oberzaucher, E., Said, H., Slice, D. E., ... Schaefer, K. (2012). ‘‘Cars have their own faces”: Cross-cultural ratings of
car shapes in biological (stereotypical) terms. Evolution and Human Behavior, 33(2), 109–120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2011.06.003.
Windhager, S., Slice, D. E., Schaefer, K., Oberzaucher, E., Thorstensen, T., & Grammer, K. (2008). Face to face: The perception of automotive designs. Human
Nature, 19(4), 331–346. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-008-9047-z.
Zimmermann, R., & Wettach, R. (2017). First Step into visceral interaction with autonomous vehicles. In Proceedings of the 9th international conference on
automotive user interfaces and interactive vehicular applications - AutomotiveUI ’17 (pp. 58–64). https://doi.org/10.1145/3122986.3122988.
D. Dey et al. / Transportation Research Part F 65 (2019) 191–205
205


