Looking and thinking when driving: The impact of gaze and
cognitive load on steering
Georgios K. Kountouriotis a,⇑, Richard M. Wilkie b, Peter H. Gardner b, Natasha Merat a
a Institute for Transport Studies, University of Leeds, United Kingdom
b Institute of Psychological Sciences, University of Leeds, United Kingdom
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 19 December 2014
Received in revised form 7 May 2015
Accepted 17 July 2015
Keywords:
Driving
Steering
Locomotion
Gaze
Cognition
Distraction
a b s t r a c t
Driving around bends at high speeds is a task performed by many on a daily basis but the
underlying mechanisms of steering control remain largely unknown. Previous research has
shown that when steering, gaze direction can be a critical component of success. However,
with increased use of in-vehicle information systems (IVIS), there is growing competition
over the same resources that are needed to steer (gaze as well as associated attentional
resources). Although it can be argued that locomotor steering is an automatic task that
can be performed without recourse to conscious ‘‘cognitive’’ control, much simpler
locomotor-related tasks, such as judging one’s heading, have been shown to be affected
by concurrent attentional tasks (Wann, Swapp, & Rushton, 2000). Here we examined
whether an attentional task placed at an offset ﬁxation point inﬂuenced concurrent
steering performance along a computer simulated road. The experiments either used
gaze-ﬁxation points that had similar properties to real-world road signs (i.e. moved
relative to the vehicle) or were more akin to IVIS (i.e. ﬁxed to the vehicle). Results showed
that gaze ﬁxation eccentric to future path caused systematic steering biases. The degree or
type of cognitive load did not change the degree of steering bias, but there was some
evidence of decreased lane variability when viewing the IVIS-type displays. No differences
in steering performance were found between the different types of cognitive task. We
conclude that where you look is critical for safe driving, and IVIS-type displays might make
drivers more susceptible to cognitive interference.
 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Locomotion, and driving in particular, fundamentally requires the ability to control steering to negotiate bends at
high-speeds whilst taking appropriate trajectories along curved roadways. The effect of additional attentional demands
imposed by activities such as cell phone use and interactions with in-vehicle systems have often been studied in terms of
reaction times to critical events, such as braking, and lane keeping (e.g., Recarte & Nunes, 2003; Salvucci & Beltowska,
2008; Strayer & Drews, 2004). However, less is known about the effect of cognitive load on steering control, and in particular
whether attentional demands interact with the direction of gaze and successful steering control.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2015.07.012
1369-8478/ 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
⇑Corresponding author at: Institute for Transport Studies, 34-40 University Road, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom.
Tel.: +44 (0)113 34 37696.
E-mail addresses: G.Kountouriotis@leeds.ac.uk (G.K. Kountouriotis), R.M.Wilkie@leeds.ac.uk (R.M. Wilkie), P.H.Gardner@leeds.ac.uk (P.H. Gardner),
N.Merat@its.leeds.ac.uk (N. Merat).
Transportation Research Part F 34 (2015) 108–121
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Transportation Research Part F
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/trf


Direction of gaze has been shown to be critically important when steering around bends (Land & Lee, 1994; Wilkie &
Wann, 2003). Although these studies propose two different models of locomotor control, both models require the driver
to look towards regions of the road ahead. According to the ‘Tangent Point’ model of steering (Land & Lee, 1994), drivers
should predominantly ﬁxate the apex of the inside road-edge. However, the ‘Active Gaze’ model of steering (Wilkie &
Wann, 2003; Wilkie, Wann, & Allison, 2008) proposes a close link between the direction of gaze and the steering trajectory
taken by drivers: under conditions of unrestrained gaze, drivers have been found to ﬁxate points on the road that lie on their
future path (Wilkie, Kountouriotis, Merat, & Wann, 2010; Wilkie & Wann, 2003; Wilkie et al., 2008). The reciprocal also
seems to be true: when gaze is forced onto points eccentric to the required curved path, drivers alter their steering trajec-
tories to pass nearer to those ﬁxation points (Kountouriotis, Floyd, Gardner, Merat, & Wilkie, 2012). This relationship has also
been observed when maintaining a trajectory along straight roads (Readinger, Chatziastros, Cunningham, Bülthoff, & Cutting,
2002). At slow speeds (e.g. when walking) decoupling gaze and steering may have little effect on successful control, however,
when driving at high speeds in rapidly changing environments decoupling gaze and steering is not advisable. Of course, in
real world scenarios, drivers often have to look away from their future path to perform various tasks, e.g. to sample
information from road signs or interact with an in-vehicle satellite navigation system. These tasks require drivers not only
to look away from their future path, but to also perform some kind of cognitive task (e.g. read a sign or decipher a map).
These concurrent tasks when driving may have an additional effect over and above eccentric ﬁxations, and therefore need
to be better understood.
In experimental settings, asking participants to perform a concurrent task whilst driving can result in changes in the
natural gaze patterns due to the task itself, e.g. looking at the speedometer. However, even tasks that do not rely on vision
and hence do not require participants to direct their gaze towards a speciﬁc location (e.g. an auditory in-vehicle information
system or talking hands-free on a phone) have been shown to affect gaze behaviours during driving (Victor, Harbluk, &
Engström, 2005). Such tasks can increase the duration of gaze ﬁxations to the road centre, along with a decrease in saccades
to the periphery (Recarte & Nunes, 2003; Victor et al., 2005). Even when gaze patterns do not change, it appears that greater
attentional load can reduce the available resources for visual processing of the scene. For example, Strayer, Drews, and
Johnston (2003) examined driving performance when drivers talked on a hands-free phone. They observed that participants
were less likely to remember seeing billboards in the conditions where they were conversing on the phone compared to the
control conditions, even though there was no difference between the two conditions in the number of ﬁxations they made on
these objects. Strayer et al. (2003) explain this ﬁnding in terms of relocating attention from driving towards the phone task.
In addition to these changes in gaze patterns, cognitive tasks may also change steering, with the variability of lane posi-
tion reducing under cognitive load conditions (Engström, Johansson, & Östlund, 2005; Jamson & Merat, 2005). There is a tight
coupling between gaze and steering: not only does steering guide the direction of gaze with drivers looking where they are
going (Wilkie & Wann, 2003, 2005; Wilkie et al., 2010) but gaze direction guides steering with drivers steering where they
look (Kountouriotis et al., 2012; Robertshaw & Wilkie, 2008). A question that arises, therefore, is whether increased cognitive
demand affects eye movements (which in turn lead to changes in steering patterns), or whether cognitive demand affects
steering patterns (which then leads to changes in eye movements). For example, Engström et al. (2005) used a cognitive load
condition which did not require drivers to look at a visual display, but they reported both greater gaze concentration around
the road centre and reduced lane keeping variation. Increased gaze concentration has also been shown in other studies using
non-visual distraction tasks (e.g. Reimer, 2009; Victor et al., 2005). One possible interpretation of these ﬁndings is that the
cognitive load increased gaze concentration around the road centre, and this in turn caused steering trajectories to pass
closer to the point of gaze (as per Wilkie & Wann, 2003; Wilkie et al., 2008, 2010).
From this evidence it is difﬁcult to conclude deﬁnitively that cognitive load inﬂuences steering directly (rather than via
gaze mechanisms). Cooper, Medeiros-Ward, and Strayer (2013) examined whether the reduced lateral variation in steering
under cognitive load was due to a reduction in lateral eye-movements (gaze concentration). Cooper et al. (2013) instructed
drivers to look at an illuminated number plate on a vehicle ahead. The illuminated plate switched between either 3 or 5 vehi-
cles in other lanes and the temporal frequency by which drivers changed their point of gaze from one vehicle to the next was
varied. The low frequency gaze changes were supposed to be similar to the patterns exhibited during ‘gaze concentration’.
This study reported that increased cognitive load did indeed lower steering variability even when gaze changes were
matched across ‘no cognitive load’ and ‘high cognitive load’ conditions. They concluded that the cognitive task caused atten-
tion to be removed from the lane-keeping task, which due to its automaticity improved (Medeiros-Ward, Cooper, & Strayer,
2014). Whilst it would seem this evidence indicates that the effects of cognitive load are independent of gaze direction, there
were some limitations to this study. There were no trials where drivers looked solely towards the road ahead, but in the con-
dition where gaze was predominantly directed to the road ahead (‘‘static predictable’’) there was no reliable effect of cog-
nitive load. It remains unclear, therefore, whether a cognitive load inﬂuences steering when natural gaze behaviours are
adopted and drivers ﬁxate their future path. A linked issue is that the non-visual nature of the cognitive task does not gen-
eralise to the common situation of retrieving and processing information from the point where you are looking (i.e. there was
no task involving information at the point of ﬁxation). Furthermore, Cooper et al. (2013) and Medeiros-Ward et al. (2014)
only examined the task of maintaining a trajectory along straight roads. Although this can be a useful paradigm for
answering questions related to lane-keeping, the task does not necessarily translate to the more general (and complex) case
of steering curved trajectories, where the driver needs to take into account both feedback information from the near road
edges as well as prospective information from the road ahead (Land & Horwood, 1995; Salvucci & Gray, 2004).
G.K. Kountouriotis et al. / Transportation Research Part F 34 (2015) 108–121
109


It has to be noted though that whilst a number of studies have shown that a reduction in lane position variability often
occurs when cognitive load increases (e.g. Engström et al., 2005; Jamson & Merat, 2005; Kubose et al., 2006; Merat, Antilla, &
Luoma, 2005), there are also conﬂicting results – i.e. an increase in lane variability under conditions of cognitive load (e.g.
Drews, Pasupathi, & Strayer, 2008; Salvucci & Beltowska, 2008). These contradictory ﬁndings may be because of differences
in task difﬁculty between various experiments, as well as the speciﬁc driving task and scenarios used.1 Moreover, most of
these studies did not speciﬁcally examine the task of bend negotiation, which requires continuous online steering control
(as opposed to lane keeping in straight roads, where the drivers only need to correct their steering when they have drifted
too much towards one side of the lane). Most importantly, however, not all of these studies provide information about where
participants were looking during lane keeping, making interpretation of the ﬁndings difﬁcult.
The evidence introduced so far suggests that secondary tasks can affect eye-movements either directly by requiring
participants to look at an in-vehicle display (IVIS), indirectly by inducing gaze concentration at the centre of the road, or
the secondary tasks can reduce overall the processing of the visual scene. The reason why a secondary task would affect
the processing of the scene is not fully understood yet, but one explanation could be the narrowing of the Useful Field of
View (UFOV: Ball, Beard, Roenker, Miller, & Griggs, 1988). The visual area where information can be sampled with one ﬁx-
ation has been named the functional ﬁeld of view (FFoV), or the useful ﬁeld of view (Ball et al., 1988). A property of the UFOV
is that its size is not constant but instead can decrease in the presence of a cognitive load on the central point of ﬁxation, thus
creating artiﬁcial tunnel vision (Williams, 1982, 1985). Whilst tunnel vision has been shown in laboratory settings, it is not
necessarily the reason for the poor peripheral detection performance during secondary tasks (e.g. Merat & Jamson, 2008). For
example, the ‘general interference theory’ states that secondary tasks are sometimes allocated more attentional resources
and this causes a concomitant decline in the performance of other concurrent detection tasks (Recarte & Nunes, 2003). In
this case, therefore, an increased cognitive load would decrease detection performance in the entire visual ﬁeld, not just
for targets presented in peripheral vision (see Victor, Engström, & Harbluk, 2008).
The research evidence seems to indicate that in order to determine whether cognitive load inﬂuences steering, one needs
to control gaze direction and eye movements. This can be achieved by enforcing gaze ﬁxation on speciﬁc points in the scene,
during single task steering, as well as dual task conditions (steering plus cognitive load). When participants are asked to
carry out a cognitive task whilst steering, predictions can be made regarding the effect that such a concurrent task will have
on steering: (a) indirectly through affecting vision which in turn affects steering performance, and (b) directly, by affecting
the control processes underpinning steering itself. In terms of (a) it has been shown that when the boundaries of the road (i.e.
the road-edges) are either visually degraded (Kountouriotis et al., 2012) or moved towards peripheral vision (Robertshaw &
Wilkie, 2008), then gaze direction has a greater inﬂuence on steering trajectories, with participants exhibiting a greater bias
towards offset ﬁxation points. In Kountouriotis et al. (2012) when the road-edges were degraded steering bias towards the
ﬁxation points increased (i.e. gaze direction had a greater input into steering than then degraded sources of information. The
greater inﬂuence of gaze direction has been explained in terms of the Active Gaze model, which combines a number of ﬂex-
ibly weighted perceptual inputs: when one of the inputs (i.e. the road-edges) becomes noisy/unreliable or unavailable, the
weighting is increased for other inputs (i.e. gaze direction; Kountouriotis et al., 2012; Wilkie & Wann, 2002; Wilkie et al.,
2008). An increased inﬂuence of gaze on steering could also, in theory, be induced without making any physical changes
to road-edge luminance or road width, but by asking the drivers to carry out a cognitive or visual task, which would reduce
the Useful Field of View (UFOV) and thus degrade the information provided by these features (Fig. 4). As such, in a steering
task when there is a visual or cognitive load on the point of gaze ﬁxation, if visual information from peripheral vision
becomes degraded (i.e. reduced UFOV), then greater steering bias towards the ﬁxation point should be observed.
In terms of scenario (b) – cognitive load affecting steering directly – steering is often viewed as highly automated, without
awareness of its procedural aspect and not relying on limited resources (Norman & Shallice, 2000; Shiffrin & Schneider,
1977). If this is the case, steering should not be subject to interference from higher-level functions such as cognitive tasks,
unless these tasks either affect eye-movements (which have been shown to be crucial for locomotion) or require a motor
response (where there would be biomechanical interference with the steering task). There is evidence, however that shows
that visual-motor tasks, such as walking (Harley, Wilkie, & Wann, 2009) and judging one’s direction of heading (Wann et al.,
2000) can be affected by concurrent cognitive tasks. In the experiments reported here we examined whether the differences
in steering patterns observed in the literature when drivers engage in visuospatial tasks and tasks that do not require visual
input (‘‘cognitive’’ tasks) can be attributed to differences in eye-movements as the Active Gaze model of steering predicts. To
this purpose, tasks similar to those used by Wann et al. (2000) that affected heading estimation were used, the rationale
being that since these tasks can affect a low-level task such as heading perception, they should affect steering too. Wann
et al. (2000) simulated linear self-motion and asked participants to perform one of three concurrent tasks (‘Arrow’,
‘Number’ and ‘Colour’). They found that two tasks (‘Arrow’ and ‘Number’) had a detrimental effect on participants’ ability
to judge the direction of simulated self-motion, with participants under-estimating the eccentricity of their heading
direction. We used similar tasks, as well as an additional auditory task (in Experiment 2) in order to have a condition where
attentional focus did not coincide with gaze focus.
1 Tasks using different cognitive resources have been postulated to have different effects on steering. Engström et al. (2005) found an increase in lane keeping
variation when using a visually demanding task compared to a more cognitive task. However, it should be noted that eye-movements rather than the task itself
might have inﬂuenced the steering ﬁndings.
110
G.K. Kountouriotis et al. / Transportation Research Part F 34 (2015) 108–121


In the ﬁrst experiment reported here visual tasks were placed at ﬁxation points at a constant angle relative to the driver
(similar to looking at an IVIS; as used by Readinger et al., 2002) and in the second experiment the ﬁxation points were posi-
tioned in relation to the world at a ﬁxed distance from the driver (as in Kountouriotis et al., 2012 and Robertshaw & Wilkie,
2008). The same ﬁxation points were used in baseline conditions (without additional cognitive load) as well as in the cog-
nitive task conditions, allowing the impact of cognitive load and gaze direction on steering to be quantiﬁed.
2. Experiment 1: Fixations relative to the vehicle (‘IVIS’)
In the ﬁrst experiment participants steered a series of bends whilst directing their gaze on to a ﬁxation cross displayed in
one of four possible eccentricities. The ﬁxation point was always at a constant angle to driver, mimicking the properties of an
in-vehicle information system. In the baseline conditions participants were asked to simply steer while ﬁxating their gaze on
the ﬁxation point, while in the task conditions they had to perform one of two tasks (judge the direction of arrows or a num-
ber series).
2.1. Methods
2.1.1. Participants
Fourteen volunteers took part in this study, eight of them were females. The mean age was 23.93 ± 4.86 years and all had
a driving license (one participant held a learner’s licence at the time of testing). All of the participants were naïve to the pur-
pose of the experiment.
2.1.2. Apparatus
A PC with Intel i7 950 (3.07 GHz) processor generated images at 60 Hz with a resolution of 1280  1024 pixels. Images
were created using WorldViz Vizard 3.0. Images were projected using a Sanyo Liquid Crystal Projector (PLC-XU58) onto a
back projection screen with dimensions of 1.98  1.43 m. Participants sat 1 m away from this screen, making the total ﬁeld
of view 89.42  71.31. A height-adjustable racing-style driving seat was used to maintain eye-height 1.20 m above the
ground. Participants sat in a matt black booth so that the projection provided the only source of light. Steering was controlled
using a force-feedback wheel (Logitech G27). Gaze data were recorded using a remote Applied Science Laboratories 504 gaze
monitoring system, which uses pan-tilt tracking to follow eye movements and was calibrated on a 9-point grid.
2.1.3. Visual stimuli
The environment consisted of a 3 m wide bending roadway and participants were instructed to steer along the centre of
the road. The road consisted of a 9 m long straight section and after that a single bend. The road curvature started at 60 m but
it reduced at a constant rate of change of 25/p m. This type of bend was used over bends with a constant curvature, where
(in theory) participants can steer by keeping the steering wheel at a constant angle. This should make the steering task more
demanding by requiring participants to constantly monitor that the turning rate is sufﬁcient. Fig. 1 shows a top-down view
of the bends used here, compared to a bend of constant curvature for comparison. In half the trials bends were ﬂipped across
the long axis to make bends curve to the right or the left. The speed was kept constant in all of the conditions at 13.8 m/s to
avoid participants negating the difﬁculty of the steering task by slowing down in the cognitive task conditions. Each trial
lasted seven seconds.
The ﬁxations used in this experiment were at a constant angle from the driver irrespective of the scene in order to imitate
the properties of in-vehicle information systems, such as the position of a satellite navigation system on a windscreen.
Four different eccentricities were used, set at 20 or 30 from the driver’s midline, either at the same direction of the bend
(named Inside and Far Inside respectively), or opposite to the direction of the bend (named Outside and Far Outside respec-
tively). For example, in a right bend, the ﬁxation point located at 20 to the right of the participant would be the Inside
ﬁxation whereas the ﬁxation pointed located 20 to the left of the participant would be the Outside ﬁxation. Fig. 2 shows
the scene with all four ﬁxation points (only one ﬁxation was visible during each trial).
Fixations with a constant offset angle from the driver were also used by Readinger et al. (2002). In their study, partici-
pants steered towards the ﬁxation points when driving along a straight road, with the magnitude of bias generally being
in proportion to the magnitude of the offset of the ﬁxation point. However, bias reached a plateau on the more extreme offset
ﬁxations (not used here). If similar results are observed in this experiment, then systematic negative biases for Far Outside
and Outside ﬁxations are expected, and positive biases for the Inside and Far Inside ﬁxations. Furthermore, the magnitude of
these biases should reﬂect the offset of the ﬁxations: larger (positive) values for the Far Inside compared to the Inside
ﬁxation, and larger (absolute) values for the Far Outside compared to the Outside ﬁxations.
2.1.4. Cognitive tasks
Two cognitive tasks were used in this experiment, ‘Arrow’ and ‘Number’, as well as a control condition, during which the
participants were asked to keep their gaze ﬁxating the target throughout the trial. The cognitive task conditions presented
information on the ﬁxation target which were similar to the Arrow and Number conditions used by Wann et al. (2000). Here,
however, instead of asking the participant to report the next arrow or number in a series, as in Wann et al. (2000), the
G.K. Kountouriotis et al. / Transportation Research Part F 34 (2015) 108–121
111


participants were asked to compare either two arrows (Arrow condition) or two numbers (Number condition) presented at
different times during the trial and make a judgement about the two stimuli. The onset of the ﬁrst stimulus was two seconds
into the trial, and the onset of the second stimulus was six seconds into the trial. Each stimulus was visible for one second.
When no arrow or number was present the ﬁxation point displayed a cross. At the end of the trial participants reported
whether the numbers ascended or descended, or whether the arrows were moving clockwise or anticlockwise. The responses
were made by pressing the right paddle of the steering wheel for ascending or clockwise and the left paddle for descending
and anticlockwise. Participants were allowed to practice the tasks until they felt comfortable performing them whilst steer-
ing. The insert of Fig. 2 shows the timings of an example Arrow condition.
Since participants had to wait until the end of the trial to make a response, reaction times do not act as a useful measure
in these experiments. In order to get an estimate of the relative difﬁculty of each task we measured separately reaction times
and accuracy rates to respond purely to the visual stimuli (using the same display timings as in the actual experiment but
without a concurrent steering task). Accuracy was similar across tasks, though RTs were quicker for ‘Number’ trials and slow-
est for ‘Arrow’ trials. The full results of this pilot are reported in the methods section of Experiment 2.
2.1.5. Experimental design and analysis
A blocked design was used to separate the task and no task (baseline) conditions, in order to avoid situations where in a
‘No Task’ condition participants expect a stimulus to appear on the ﬁxation point and therefore allocate more attentional
resources than they would do otherwise. This provides us with a relatively pure measure of steering when ﬁxating the signs
without additional cognitive load. To minimise the confounding effects of practice and fatigue the no-load condition was
Fig. 1. Example of a spiral bend (where the radius reduces at a constant rate) compared to a bend of constant curvature.
Fig. 2. The four possible ﬁxation points in Experiment 1 were always at the same offset angle (20 or 30 in either direction) relative to the driver’s midline.
Only one ﬁxation was visible during each trial. The insert shows an example sequence for the ‘Arrow’ condition, where the correct response (after
locomotion ﬁnishes) would be ‘clockwise’ (right button press). The same timings were used in all task conditions.
112
G.K. Kountouriotis et al. / Transportation Research Part F 34 (2015) 108–121


repeated twice, at both the beginning and end of the testing session. Participants completed the ‘No Task 1’ block with the
control conditions (6 trials of 4 ﬁxations, half in right bends and half in left bends). Then in the second block (‘Task’ block)
they completed the two cognitive tasks randomly interleaved (6 trials of 4 ﬁxations  3 tasks, half of them right bends and
half left). Finally, the ‘No Task 2’ block repeated the control condition (6 trials of 4 ﬁxations).
2.2. Results and discussion
2.2.1. Cognitive task performance
In order to examine performance during the two cognitive tasks, accuracy scores (i.e. the percentage of correct responses)
were calculated. The proportion of correct responses averaged across participants for the Arrow and Number tasks were
91.07% and 93.15% respectively, indicating that the participants performed well in both tasks, and to a similar level as when
performing the tasks without steering (See Table 1, Experiment 2 for a pilot experiment examining all secondary tasks without
steering). A paired-samples t-test found no signiﬁcant difference between the Arrow and Number tasks, t(13) = 1.71, p = .110.
2.2.2. Steering bias
Steering bias is a directional measure of steering error, measuring the overall tendency of the driver to steer towards the
outside road edge (negative values), or the inside road edge (positive values) relative to the centre of the road (zero bias). A 4
(levels of Task: No Task 1, Arrow, Number and No Task 2) by 4 (levels of ﬁxations: Far Inside, Inside, Outside and Far Outside)
repeated-measures ANOVA was carried out on the steering bias values. There was no signiﬁcant effect of Task, F(3,39) = 1.92,
p = .143, but a signiﬁcant main effect of Fixation, F(3,39) = 3.55, p = .023, gp
2 = .21, and a signiﬁcant interaction between Task
and Fixation, F(9,117) = 2.41, p = .015, gp
2 = .16, shown in Fig. 3.
When No Task 1 is removed from the ANOVA so that Task has only three levels and Fixation four levels, the interaction
between Fixation and Task ceases to be signiﬁcant, F(6,78) = 1.04, p = .405. It seems then that the interaction is driven by the
behaviour of the participants in the No Task 1 condition/block where there are systematic directional steering biases caused
by ﬁxation direction (white triangles on Fig. 3). Fixating Far Outside causes the greatest understeer (i.e. steering towards the
outside edge) and ﬁxating Far Inside causes the greatest oversteer (steering towards the inside edge) with the intermediate
conditions causing smaller biases in the direction of ﬁxation. This is the result that would be expected if participants steered
in the direction of gaze (Kountouriotis et al., 2012; Readinger et al., 2002; Robertshaw & Wilkie, 2008).
For all other conditions (Tasks and No Task 2) participants did exhibit some degree of bias caused by ﬁxation direction.
This is shown by the direction of slopes between Far Inside and Inside ﬁxation (Fig. 3, greater oversteer in Far Inside), and
Outside and Far Outside (greater understeer in Far Outside than Outside). However, there is a second factor inﬂuencing
steering that causes participants to steer away from the direction of gaze – this is most obvious in the Outside and Inside
ﬁxation conditions comparing No Task 2 with No Task 1 (Fig. 3, white squares vs. white triangles).
We believe that this steering bias is due to a property of the static ﬁxation points used. If the driver steers in the opposite
direction of ﬁxation then this causes a change in the scene and makes the centre of the road lie closer to the point of gaze.
This means that the road will fall closer to central vision and so may provide more useful information to participants (Fig. 4
illustrates this effect). The fact that this behaviour is not exhibited in the No Task 1 block (which was always presented ﬁrst)
indicates that steering away from gaze may be a learnt response to try to reduce the biases caused by eccentric ﬁxation. It
Fig. 3. The interaction between Fixation and Task conditions in steering bias. When participants ﬁxate on the Inside they steer towards the inside road edge
in No Task 1 relatively to the rest of the task conditions, and they also understeer in the Outside ﬁxation condition compared to the rest of the task
conditions.
G.K. Kountouriotis et al. / Transportation Research Part F 34 (2015) 108–121
113


appears therefore that participants learnt to alter their natural steering behaviour in order to ‘move’ the road towards their
point of gaze. This demonstrates remarkable ﬂexibility in the coordination of gaze and steering.
It was expected that due to a narrowing of the UFOV (Ball et al., 1988; Williams, 1982, 1985) participants’ steering would
be inﬂuenced more by gaze direction (with participants exhibiting greater biases towards the ﬁxation points) when a
concurrent task was present compared to the No Task conditions. There were, however, no differential effects of cognitive
task on steering bias.
2.2.3. RMS steering error
RMS error is calculated by taking the square of the signed steering error (bias) for every frame, averaging across frames
and then taking the square root. It provides an overall estimate of how close the participant was to the centre of the road in a
given trial but is unsigned (in contrast to bias which shows whether there was systematic over/understeer but underesti-
mate large errors that are not biased). Low RMS scores indicate participants stayed near the centre of the road whereas high
values indicate participants were away from the centre. As with steering bias, a 4 (levels of Task) by 4 (Fixations)
repeated-measures ANOVA was carried out on the RMS values. There was a signiﬁcant main effect of Task conditions,
F(3,39) = 14.10, p < .001, gp
2 = .52, as well as a signiﬁcant main effect of Fixation conditions, F(3,39) = 8.31, p < .001,
gp
2 = .39. No signiﬁcant interaction was found between these two factors, F(4.23,55.01) = 0.47, p = .764.
The main effect of Fixation is shown in Fig. 5a. Repeated planned contrasts indicate that RMS error in the Inside ﬁxation
condition was signiﬁcantly lower both from the Far Inside ﬁxation, F(1,13) = 23.41, p < .001, and the Outside ﬁxation condi-
tion, F(1,13) = 10.94, p = .006. No difference was found between the Outside and Far Outside ﬁxations, F(1,13) = 1.96,
p = .185. The lower RMS error in the Inside ﬁxation condition is in line with the ﬁndings of Kountouriotis et al. (2012), where
ﬁxation on the inside of the bend produced lower RMS scores than ﬁxation on the outside of the bend. It appears, however,
that the advantage of ﬁxating on the inside of the bend is lost when the ﬁxation is moved further away from the road centre
(Far Inside ﬁxation).
Fig. 4. Over/under-steering and the relation of the ﬁxation point to the road. (a) Steering away from the point of gaze means that the road is closer to
central vision (see shaded circle). (b) Steering towards the point of gaze moves the road towards peripheral vision where not only there is less visual acuity
but the gaze angle has not been reduced. The dark grey discs demonstrate a 30 zone indicating central vision (these discs were not visible to the
participants).
114
G.K. Kountouriotis et al. / Transportation Research Part F 34 (2015) 108–121


The main effect of Task on RMS error is shown in Fig. 5b. We ﬁrst compared the two task conditions using a t-test which
showed no difference between the two, t(13) = .62, p = .55. Therefore we collapsed these two conditions and ran a 3-way
ANOVA comparing No Task 1, Tasks, and No Task 2 which was signiﬁcant, F(2,26) = 12.66, p < .001, gp
2 = .49. Pairwise com-
parisons with Sidak correction showed that No Task 1 was signiﬁcantly higher than Tasks (p < .001), No Task 2 was signif-
icantly higher than Tasks (p = .034) but there were no differences between No Task 1 and No Task 2 (p = .276).
An interesting phenomenon occurs here: RMS scores, usually indicative of steering error and variability in steering per-
formance, are higher when participants do not perform a secondary task. As discussed in the Introduction, this ﬁnding can be
explained by previous research. One measure that might help interpret the present ﬁndings is steering reversal rate (McLean
& Hoffmann, 1975).
2.2.4. Steering reversals
If RMS error reﬂects reduced steering variability in the tasks conditions compared to baseline then we should see the
same pattern when using a measure such as steering reversals. Steering reversal rate can be deﬁned as the number of times
per minute that the direction of the steering wheel changes by a ﬁnite amount – from half a degree to 10 (Macdonald &
Hoffmann, 1980; McLean & Hoffmann, 1975). In our experiment trials only lasted for a relatively short duration (7 s), so
we generated a measure of steering reversals using the rate of change of the steering wheel angle and then identifying
any peaks above 1 in the opposite direction of the required steering response. We used these criteria in order to capture
instances where participants needed to make major adjustments to their trajectory rather than capturing overall steering
input (though bidirectional reversals of 0.5 and 0.1 revealed similar patterns as in the reported metric). Similar to the anal-
ysis of RMS steering error, a t-test was carried out to compare the difference in number of steering reversals (see Fig. 6)
between Number and Arrow, which showed no signiﬁcant difference, t(13) = .56, p = .588. Therefore we collapsed across
the tasks conditions and ran a repeated-measures ANOVA with one factor with 3 levels (No Task 1, Tasks, No Task 2).
There was a signiﬁcant main effect, F(2,16) = 17.61, p < .001, gp
2 = .575. Pairwise comparisons with Sidak corrections showed
that differences were signiﬁcant between all three conditions. Participants in the No Task 1 condition made more steering
reversals compared to the Tasks condition (p < .001), and also more steering reversals compared to No Task 2 (p = .027).
Additionally, in No Task 2 participants made more steering reversals compared to the Tasks (p = .032).
When participants had a cognitive load they made fewer steering reversals compared to the conditions without a cogni-
tive load. This ﬁnding is in line with the observations of Macdonald and Hoffmann (1980) who suggested that increasing the
demands on a steering task with a cognitive load causes a reduction in steering reversals; they argue that this happens
because when participants have to perform a demanding concurrent task they remove their attention from the steering task
Fig. 5. RMS steering error. (a) The main effect of Fixation. Participants perform better when they ﬁxate on the inside of the bend, but this advantage of the
inside ﬁxation does not exist on the more extreme Far Inside ﬁxation. (b) The main effect of Task. Participants’ RMS errors are lower when they perform a
secondary task (either Arrow or Number) compared to the conditions where there is no concurrent task.
G.K. Kountouriotis et al. / Transportation Research Part F 34 (2015) 108–121
115


and therefore make fewer corrective adjustments. The alternative explanation is that steering performance is actually
improving when attention is shifted away, because steering is such a highly-automated task (Medeiros-Ward et al.,
2014). This argument equates reduced variability with better performance, but this relationship is commonly observed in
experts performing a number of skilled visual-motor tasks, for example baseball (Gray, 2004), golf and football (Beilock,
Carr, MacMahon, & Starkes, 2002) as well as typing (Tapp & Logan, 2011).
3. Experiment 2: Fixations in relation to the world (‘Road Signs’)
The ﬁrst experiment showed that ﬁxations on signs at a constant angle relative to the observer led to reduced steering
corrections in the task conditions. In terms of directional errors (steering bias), participants steered in the direction of gaze
in the ﬁrst experimental block, but in the following blocks they steered in a way that would bring relevant information closer
to central vision. In the second experiment the ﬁxation points were positioned in the world, and their position updated every
frame so they were always at a ﬁxed distance ahead of the observer. Additionally, being positioned in the world they created
a gaze angle that could be reduced if the participant steered towards them (see Kountouriotis et al., 2012; Robertshaw &
Wilkie, 2008). This means that participants could close down the angle between their midline and gaze direction. These ﬁx-
ation points have similar properties to road signs, in that drivers can reduce their gaze angle by steering towards them
(although unlike real signs these ﬁxation points were always kept a set distance away and were always perpendicular to
the observer to ensure clear and consistent visibility of the sign).
In Experiment 2 we also decided to employ an additional task: participants looked at the same ﬁxation points, but were
asked to evaluate auditory information rather than visual information (‘Sound’ task). The form of the task was similar to the
visual task: participants heard two sounds of different frequencies and after trials ﬁnished they had to indicate whether the
second sound had a lower or higher frequency than the ﬁrst (using left or right button presses). The rationale for using this
task was that the Number and Arrow tasks should draw attention to the ﬁxation point, but the Sound task should not.
Therefore, according to the UFOV theory, no narrowing of the visual ﬁeld should be observed in the Sound task, which would
make participants less likely to exhibit large steering biases towards the point of ﬁxation.
In order to accommodate ﬁxations located at the centre of the road, the road width was increased by 1 m (4 m wide, com-
pared to 3 m wide in Experiment 1). This increase in road width should allow for higher RMS/steering variability errors,
which could differentiate between the different cognitive tasks (something Experiment 1 did not show and could have been
due to the relatively narrow roads used).
3.1. Methods
3.1.1. Participants
Twelve participants took part in this study (six females) with a mean age of 20.5 ± 0.79 years. Ten participants held a valid
driving license at the time of testing. The two non-drivers did not perform differently from the drivers.2 All of the participants
were naïve to the purpose of the experiment.
3.1.2. Apparatus
The same apparatus was used as in Experiment 1.
Fig. 6. Number of steering wheel reversals for each Task condition. Participants perform fewer steering reversals when there is a secondary task compared
to the conditions without a concurrent task.
2 We re-ran all analyses excluding the participants without a driving licence, but this had no effect on the pattern of the statistical results.
116
G.K. Kountouriotis et al. / Transportation Research Part F 34 (2015) 108–121


3.1.3. Visual stimuli
The same bends as Experiment 1 were used, with the only difference being that the roads were 4 m wide (instead of 3 m
wide in Experiment 1) in order to accommodate for the different ﬁxation points used here.
The ﬁxations used in this experiment had different properties compared to the ﬁxations used in the previous experiment.
Three ﬁxation points were used, one in the centre of the road approximately 16.1 m ahead of the participant, and two either
side of the road, 2 m outside either road edge. These ﬁxation points were not ﬁxed on the ground, instead their position was
updated on every frame so they maintained the same distance in front of the driver. However, they were also linked to the
world so if the driver steered towards the ﬁxation point the angle of gaze would reduce.
3.1.4. Cognitive tasks
Three cognitive tasks were used in this experiment, the Arrow and Number tasks from Experiment 1, and an additional
auditory task (Sound task). This task was added in order to examine whether steering control is affected by a cognitive task
that does not require any visual processing. A simple ﬁxation cross was used to control the location of participants’ gaze
throughout the Sound task, similar to the other tasks. Participants heard two tones presented sequentially at different fre-
quencies (eight tones were used ranging from 240 Hz to 590 Hz in 50 Hz increments). At the end of the trial participants
indicated if the second sound had a higher or lower frequency than the ﬁrst. Participants responded in the same way as
in the Number task by pressing the right paddle for ‘higher’ and the left paddle for ‘lower’. The timings of the Sound task
were identical to the Arrow and Number tasks (see Fig. 2) with each sound lasting for 1 s.
As with Experiment 1, a blocked design was used. First participants completed the control conditions (6 trials of 3 ﬁxa-
tions) (No Task 1 block). Then in the second block the three cognitive tasks were randomly interleaved (6 trials of 3 ﬁxa-
tions  3 tasks). Finally, they repeated a control block with no cognitive task (6 trials of 3 ﬁxations) (No Task 2).
Conditions within each block were always randomised and half of the 6 trials of every condition were right bends and half
of them left bends.
Since participants had to wait until the end of each trial to respond to the tasks, it is not useful to measure reaction times for
these tasks. Therefore a pilot study was conducted using these tasks (with the same timings as in the actual experiments) but
without any steering. Ten participants (mean age = 21.6 years) sat in the driving simulator and were presented with eight trials
of each of the three cognitive tasks. Participants were asked to respond as quickly and accurately as possible at the onset of the
second stimulus. The reaction times and percent correct results are shown in Table 1. Two repeated-measures ANOVAs were
conducted, one for reaction times and one for accuracy. A signiﬁcant main effect was found on reaction times, F(2,18) = 4.99,
p = .019, gp
2 = .36, but no signiﬁcant differences were found on the accuracy scores, F(2,18) = 1.56, p = .237. Pairwise compar-
isons with LSD adjustment showed that participants were signiﬁcantly slower in the Arrow task compared to the Number task
(p = .026); no other differences were found. The results indicate that although participants took more time to make a judge-
ment on the relative directions of the arrows in the Arrow task, the three tasks gave similar results in terms of accuracy.
3.2. Results and discussion
3.2.1. Cognitive task performance
Performance in the three cognitive tasks during the steering study was assessed using accuracy scores (i.e. the percentage
of correct responses). The accuracy scores were analysed using a repeated-measures ANOVA with three levels. No signiﬁcant
difference was found between tasks in terms of accuracy, F(2,22) = 0.68, p = .516, consistent with the results obtained with-
out steering (see Table 1). Although it appears that accuracy scores were lower in experiment 2 compared to the results with
no steering (Number: mean = 80.09%, SD = 26.95; Arrow: mean = 73.61%, SD = 26.50; Sound: mean = 75.46%, SD = 25.34) this
was largely driven by four participants making incorrect response in approximately half of the trials. We re-ran all of the
following analyses without these participants and the patterns remained largely unaffected.
3.2.2. Steering bias
A 3 (ﬁxation points: Inside, Centre, Outside) by 5 (task conditions: No Task 1, Arrow, Sound, Number, No Task 2)
repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted on the steering bias values. There was a signiﬁcant main effect of Fixation,
Table 1
Mean and standard deviation of reaction times and accuracy scores for the three cognitive tasks
without steering.
Reaction times (s)
Accuracy (%)
x
SD
x
SD
Number
0.69
0.14
94.17
10.43
Arrow
1.01
0.47
90.00
8.61
Sound
0.82
0.30
95.00
9.96
G.K. Kountouriotis et al. / Transportation Research Part F 34 (2015) 108–121
117


F(2,22) = 11.29, p < .001, gp
2 = .51, with participants steering towards their point of gaze (see Fig. 7a). There was also a main
effect of Task, F(4,44) = 3.10, p = .025, gp
2 = .22, shown in Fig. 7b with a general pattern of oversteer (i.e. steering towards the
inside road edge). There was no signiﬁcant interaction between Fixation and Task, F(8,88) = .81, p = .593.
The main effect of Fixation on steering bias was examined using planned contrasts. A signiﬁcant difference was found
between the Outside and Central ﬁxations, F(1,11) = 15.54, p = .002, but no signiﬁcant difference was found between the
Central and Inside ﬁxations, F(1,11) = 0.78, p = .397. This pattern is similar to the steering behaviour exhibited in
Kountouriotis et al. (2012), and can be explained by the tendency of drivers to oversteer when negotiating bends (as
observed in Wilkie et al., 2010; Raw, Kountouriotis, Mon-Williams, & Wilkie, 2012).
The signiﬁcant main effect of Task (Fig. 7b) was analysed using pairwise comparisons with Sidak correction. The only sig-
niﬁcant difference was between the No Task 1 and Sound conditions, p = .047. Across all ﬁxation conditions, participants
over-steered more in the Sound condition compared to the No Task 1 condition where they stay closer to the centre of
the road.
The fact that no signiﬁcant interaction was found between Task and Fixation conditions indicates that gaze had a similar
effect across the Task conditions. This does not match the predictions of attention load models of cognition. There appears to
be no ‘tunnelling effect’ (reduced UFOV) in this experiment. However, in order to draw any ﬁrm conclusions on the effect of
the cognitive tasks on steering these results have to be examined along with other steering metrics, namely RMS steering
error and steering reversals.
3.2.3. RMS steering error
A 3 (ﬁxation points) by 5 (task conditions) repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted for the RMS steering error. There
was no signiﬁcant main effect of Fixation, F(2,22) = 2.52, p = .103, no signiﬁcant main effect of Task, F(2.22, 24.43) = 0.926,
p = .458, and no signiﬁcant interaction between Fixation and Task conditions, F(8,88) = 1.73, p = .103.
These ﬁndings are in contrast to Experiment 1, where in the Arrow and Number conditions participants had lower RMS
errors compared to the No Task conditions. The differences between the two experiments were the inclusion of an auditory
task in Experiment 2, the wider road, and the different properties of the ﬁxation points. There is no reason to assume that
including a third task would lower participants’ RMS errors in the other two tasks. The wider road used should in theory
increase RMS errors overall (because road-edges are moved further into peripheral vision, see Robertshaw & Wilkie,
2008; Kountouriotis et al., 2012), but also it should allow for more variation in RMS errors and thus accentuate any differ-
ences between task conditions that could have been missed in narrower roads. Instead, we believe that reduced errors may
be due to the nature of gaze ﬁxation in this task. The ﬁxations used in this experiment biased steering trajectories towards
the direction of participants’ gaze, and that reduced the gaze angle offset. When the ﬁxations are set at a constant offset angle
from the participants (like in Experiment 1), the gaze angle is never reduced. If participants steer in the direction of gaze the
offset gaze angle does not close down, and the more they steer towards the ﬁxation point, the more this trajectory moves
away from the centre of the road. Therefore, drivers seemed to develop a strategy (described in Experiment 1) to mitigate
the adverse effects of steering indeﬁnitely towards their ﬁxation point. This strategy is potentially the reason why there
is a difference in RMS steering error between the Task conditions in Experiment 1.
3.2.4. Steering reversals
Given the strong link between RMS steering error and steering wheel reversals observed in Experiment 1, no differences
are expected in the number of reversals in the different task conditions, similar to the non-signiﬁcant ﬁndings in RMS steer-
ing error in this experiment. Indeed, the 5-level (No Task 1, Arrow, Number, Sound, No Task 2) repeated-measures ANOVA
used to analyse the steering reversals in this experiment showed no signiﬁcant effect of Task, F(1.90,20.99) = 0.54, p = .707.
In fact, participants made almost no steering reversals as deﬁned in the previous experiment: the average reversals (across 3
ﬁxations, 6 trials each) for No Task 1 was 0.02, for Number 0.03, for Arrow 0.03, for Sound 0.04, and for No Task 2 0.02. In
Experiment 1, the lowest number of reversals was 0.30 in the Arrow condition (see Fig. 6).This lack of steering reversals is
probably due to the different ﬁxation points used here, as discussed above.
By using offset ﬁxations where the driver could reduce the offset of the gaze angle – by steering closer to the ﬁxation
point – the steering task seems to have been easier compared to Experiment 1 where the offset gaze angle could never
be reduced. This could be the reason for the lack of an effect of concurrent tasks in Experiment 2. These results indicate that
looking on a point in the world (and not on an in-vehicle information system) may result in better steering.
4. General discussion
Our research examined the effects of a number of cognitive tasks on steering. Unlike previous work, we recorded steering
along a set of bending roadways when gaze direction was controlled in task and no-task conditions. When ‘road sign’ ﬁxa-
tions were used (ﬁxed position relative to the road) participants steered towards the direction of their gaze, a ﬁnding in line
with the Active Gaze model of steering (Wilkie et al., 2008). When a cognitive load was added the bias towards the ﬁxation
point did not increase; higher bias towards the point of gaze would indicate that other sources of visual information (such as
road-edges or retinal ﬂow) are being weighted less (Kountouriotis et al., 2012; Wilkie & Wann, 2003). It appears that the
overall processing of the scene did not alter with the addition of cognitive load since participants were largely unaffected
118
G.K. Kountouriotis et al. / Transportation Research Part F 34 (2015) 108–121


by the different cognitive task conditions in terms of steering bias as well as steering variability. However, when IVIS ﬁxa-
tions were used (ﬁxed position relative to the vehicle), participants had lower RMS steering error under the cognitive load
conditions. This seems to indicate that the direction of gaze can interact with cognitive load and inﬂuence the resources
available to steer. Our ﬁxation points in Experiment 1 resembled IVIS displays, but similar properties can be seen in
head-up displays (HUDs) in terms of the constant angle to the driver regardless of the trajectory they take. One crucial dif-
ference is that HUDs can display information in front of the driver rather than requiring them to turn their head towards an
IVIS which is preferable since it does not take gaze away from the scene and potential hazards. One possible limitation of this
method of displaying information is that during bend negotiation a HUD would direct gaze towards the direction of instan-
taneous heading rather than the drivers’ future path. It is not safe to assume that such shifts in gaze are safe, and further
experiments are needed in order to clarify any detriments/improvements in driving behaviour associated with HUDs.
It should be highlighted that it is currently unclear why RMS error and steering reversals decrease when a cognitive load
is added to the steering task. Macdonald and Hoffmann (1980) attempted to explain the negative relationship between con-
current task difﬁculty and reversal rates in terms of participants removing attention from the steering task. If participants fail
to attend the steering task then fewer corrective steering adjustments would be made (and so fewer reversals). In line with
this, Jamson and Merat (2005) found that as the demands of a concurrent auditory task increased, lane variation (a measure
similar to RMS error) decreased. It should be noted that lane variation actually increased during their ‘visual task’, but this
may have simply been caused by head and eye movements sampling information from the screen presenting the visual task
(the display was placed in the car in front of the radio control panels). Medeiros-Ward et al. (2014) argue that the reduction
in steering variability under conditions of cognitive load is due to positive effects on performance of highly-automated tasks
that do not require (and in fact will be impaired by) attention.
One difﬁculty with interpreting a low reversal rate is that this measure merely reﬂects few steering adjustments. In some
cases this could be because of a lack of response to steering errors, but it could also be because there is simply no need to
make a steering adjustment (i.e. steering performance is not errorful in the ﬁrst place). To try to address this in our exper-
iment reversals were deﬁned as peaks in the opposite direction of the required steering response; in the literature, however,
reversals can be deﬁned as peaks in any direction.3 Without comparing trajectories with the optimal steering line it can be
difﬁcult to draw ﬁrm conclusions from steering reversals. Also, our relatively short trial duration (7 s) might have made it less
likely for large heading errors to unfold, so ﬁndings from steering reversals should be interpreted in conjunction with the other
metrics. In the present experiments, participants were instructed to stay in the centre of the road in order to be able to extract a
useful measure of steering error and bias. Steering bias shows that trajectories were inﬂuenced by the point of gaze. We also
found that the steering system is sufﬁciently ﬂexible that participants can learn to steer away from the direction of ﬁxation
in order to bring visual information about the road towards central vision.
In Experiment 1, the effect of the two tasks on steering performance was similar. These results are in contrast to those of
other studies (e.g. Engström et al., 2005; Jamson & Merat, 2005) where steering performance was differentially affected by
visual and cognitive load. One explanation for this contradiction may be the differences in gaze patterns across experiments.
In previous work the visual tasks required gaze to be directed to a separate display and away from the road. In contrast the
present experiments controlled gaze direction and we observed no differences in steering performance between different
task conditions. Future studies in the area should take into account that differences in eye-movements between cognitive
and visual task conditions might mediate any differences observed in steering performance.
Fig. 7. Steering Bias results for Experiment 2. Positive values indicate oversteer trajectories that cut closer to the inside of the bend than the middle of the
road. (a) The main effect of ﬁxation collapsed across Task conditions, whereby participants steer more towards the inside of the bend, when the ﬁxation
point is positioned beyond the inside edge of the road. (b) The main effect of Task collapsed across ﬁxation conditions. Participants oversteer more in the
Sound task compared to No Task 1.
3 When reversals are deﬁned in this way, it is very hard to distinguish between genuine reversals which adjust the steering course and variability in the
steering response or, indeed, from simply unwanted noise.
G.K. Kountouriotis et al. / Transportation Research Part F 34 (2015) 108–121
119


In Experiment 2 offset ﬁxations systematically biased steering, but the biases were not mediated by cognitive load; this
ﬁnding suggests that there was no narrowing of the UFoV. The ﬁxations used in Experiment 2 biased participants towards
the direction of their gaze, which in turn reduced the angle of gaze. When the ﬁxations were set at a constant eccentricity
relative to the driver (Experiment 1), the angle could not be reduced. As such, it could be argued that the steering task in
Experiment 1 was generally more challenging than in Experiment 2 and this could account for differences in the effect of
cognitive tasks on steering. The differences in the ﬁxation point properties map directly to real-world examples: information
can be presented inside vehicles (for example in in-vehicle displays), in which case the driver cannot close down gaze angle,
or outside of vehicles, for example road-signs, where gaze angle is not constant. Our data suggest that information presented
on road signs may interfere less with steering, particularly if positioned in the direction you wish to travel. There are addi-
tional good reasons why looking away from your future path while driving for more than a few seconds poses increased risks
in driver safety. For example, Liang, Lee, and Horrey (2014) in a large naturalistic driving study found that drivers looked
away more from their future path in the seconds preceding a crash or a near miss. They argued that looking away from your
future path for more than 1.7 s poses a risk hazard (Liang et al., 2014).
In conclusion, we have shown that gaze direction is a critically important factor in successful steering control. Concurrent
cognitive tasks can have an effect on steering around bends, but this is dependent on the demands placed upon gaze and
steering. We found no differences in steering performance across different cognitive tasks, presumably because we con-
trolled for the direction of participants’ gaze. Additionally, we have shown that gaze direction towards a point similar to
an in-vehicle information system makes drivers more susceptible to cognitive interference as measured by reduced RMS
error rates.
Acknowledgments
GK was funded by an EPSRC Doctoral Training Grant and subsequently by EPSRC EP/J002933/1 as a Research Fellow. The
EPSRC had no involvement in the design, data collection, analysis and interpretation, in the writing of the report or in the
decision to submit for publication. Thanks to John Wann for the loan of the eye-tracking equipment used in these
experiments.
References
Ball, K. K., Beard, B. L., Roenker, D. L., Miller, R. L., & Griggs, D. S. (1988). Age and visual search: Expanding the useful ﬁeld of view. Journal of Optical Society of
America, 5, 2210–2219.
Beilock, S. L., Carr, T. H., MacMahon, C., & Starkes, J. L. (2002). When paying attention becomes counterproductive: Impact of divided versus skill-focused
attention on novice and experienced performance of sensorimotor skills. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 8(1), 6–16.
Cooper, J. M., Medeiros-Ward, N., & Strayer, D. L. (2013). The impact of eye movements and cognitive workload on lateral position variability in driving.
Human Factors, 55(5), 1001–1014.
Drews, F. A., Pasupathi, M., & Strayer, D. L. (2008). Passenger and cell-phone conversations in simulated driving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied,
14(4), 392–400.
Engström, J., Johansson, E., & Östlund, J. (2005). Effects of visual and cognitive load in real and simulated motorway driving. Transportation Research Part F:
Trafﬁc Psychology and Behaviour, 8, 97–120.
Gray, R. (2004). Attending to the execution of a complex sensorimotor skill: Expertise differences, choking, and slumps. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 10(1), 42–54.
Harley, C., Wilkie, R. M., & Wann, J. P. (2009). Stepping over obstacles: Attention demands and aging. Gait Posture, 29, 428–432.
Jamson, A. H., & Merat, N. (2005). Surrogate in-vehicle information systems and driver behaviour: Effects of visual and cognitive load in simulated rural
driving. Transportation Research Part F: Trafﬁc Psychology and Behaviour, 8, 79–96.
Kountouriotis, G. K., Floyd, R. C., Gardner, P. H., Merat, N., & Wilkie, R. M. (2012). The role of gaze and road edge information during high-speed locomotion.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 38(3), 687–702.
Kubose, T. T., Bock, K., Dell, G. S., Garnsey, S. M., Kramer, A. F., & Mayhugh, J. (2006). The effects of speech production and speech comprehension on
simulated driving performance. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20, 43–63.
Land, M. F., & Horwood, J. (1995). Which parts of the road guide steering? Nature, 377, 339–340.
Land, M. F., & Lee, D. N. (1994). Where we look when we steer. Nature, 369, 742–744.
Liang, Y., Lee, J. D., & Horrey, W. J. (2014). A looming crisis: The distribution of off-road glance duration in moments leading up to crashes/near-crashes in
naturalistic driving. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 58th Annual Meeting, 58(1), 2102–2106.
Macdonald, W. A., & Hoffmann, E. R. (1980). Review of relationships between steering wheel reversals rate and driving task demand. Human Factors, 22(6),
733–739.
McLean, J. R., & Hoffmann, E. R. (1975). Steering reversals as a measure of driver performance and steering task difﬁculty. Human Factors, 17, 248–256.
Medeiros-Ward, N., Cooper, J. M., & Strayer, D. L. (2014). Hierarchical control and driving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143(3), 953–958.
Merat, N., Antilla, V., & Luoma, J. (2005). Comparing the driving performance of average and older drivers: The effect of surrogate in-vehicle information
systems. Transportation Research Part F: Trafﬁc Psychology and Behaviour, 8, 147–166.
Merat, N., & Jamson, A. H. (2008). The effects of stimulus modality on signal detection: Implications for assessing the safety of in-vehicle technology. Human
Factors, 50(1), 145–158.
Norman, D. A., & Shallice, T. (2000). Attention to action: Willed and automatic control of behavior. In M. S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), Cognitive neuroscience: A reader.
Oxford: Blackwell Publishers Ltd..
Raw, R. K., Kountouriotis, G. K., Mon-Williams, M., & Wilkie, R. M. (2012). Age differences in motor-control: Does old age mean middle of the road? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 38(3), 735–745.
Readinger, W. O., Chatziastros, A., Cunningham, D. W., Bülthoff, H. H., & Cutting, J. E. (2002). Gaze-eccentricity effects on road position and steering. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 8(4), 247–258.
Recarte, M. A., & Nunes, L. M. (2003). Mental workload while driving: Effects on visual search, discrimination, and decision making. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 9(2), 119–137.
Reimer, B. (2009). Cognitive task complexity and the impact on drivers’ visual tunneling. Transportation Research Record, 2138, 13–19.
Robertshaw, K. D., & Wilkie, R. M. (2008). Does gaze inﬂuence steering around a bend? Journal of Vision, 8(4). 18.1–13.
120
G.K. Kountouriotis et al. / Transportation Research Part F 34 (2015) 108–121


Salvucci, D. D., & Beltowska, J. (2008). Effects of memory rehearsal on driver performance: Experiment and theoretical account. Human Factors, 50(5),
834–844.
Salvucci, D. D., & Gray, R. (2004). A two-point visual control model of steering. Perception, 33, 1233–1248.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Schneider, W. (1977). Controlled and automatic human information processing: II. Perceptual learning, automatic attending, and a general
theory. Psychological Review, 84(2), 127–190.
Strayer, D. L., & Drews, F. A. (2004). Proﬁles in driver distraction: Effects of cell phone conversations on younger and older drivers. Human Factors, 46,
640–649.
Strayer, D. L., Drews, F. A., & Johnston, W. A. (2003). Cell phone-induced failures of visual attention during simulated driving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied, 9(1), 23–32.
Tapp, K. M., & Logan, G. D. (2011). Attention to the hands disrupts skilled typewriting: The role of vision in producing the disruption. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 73, 2379–2383.
Victor, T. W., Engström, J., & Harbluk, J. L. (2008). Distraction assessment methods based on visual behavior and event detection. In M. Regan, J. Lee, & K.
Young (Eds.), Driver distraction: Theory. Effects and Mitigation: CRC Press.
Victor, T. W., Harbluk, J. L., & Engström, J. (2005). Sensitivity of eye-movement measures to in-vehicle task difﬁculty. Transportation Research Part F: Trafﬁc
Psychology and Behaviour, 8(2), 167–190.
Wann, J. P., Swapp, D., & Rushton, S. K. (2000). Heading perception and the allocation of attention. Vision Research, 40(18), 2533–2543.
Wilkie, R. M., Kountouriotis, G. K., Merat, N., & Wann, J. P. (2010). Using vision to control locomotion: Looking where you want to go. Experimental Brain
Research, 204(4), 539–547.
Wilkie, R. M., & Wann, J. P. (2002). Driving as night falls: The contribution of retinal ﬂow and visual direction to the control of steering. Current Biology,
12(23), 2014–2017.
Wilkie, R. M., & Wann, J. P. (2003). Controlling steering and judging heading: Retinal ﬂow, visual direction, and extraretinal information. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 29(2), 363–378.
Wilkie, R. M., & Wann, J. P. (2005). The role of visual and nonvisual information in the control of locomotion. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 31(5), 901–911.
Wilkie, R. M., Wann, J. P., & Allison, R. S. (2008). Active gaze, visual look-ahead, and locomotor control. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 34(5), 1150–1164.
Williams, L. J. (1982). Cognitive load and the functional ﬁeld of view. Human Factors, 24(6), 683–692.
Williams, L. J. (1985). Tunnel vision induced by a foveal load manipulation. Human Factors, 27, 221–227.
G.K. Kountouriotis et al. / Transportation Research Part F 34 (2015) 108–121
121


