Capture by Context Elements, Not Attentional
Suppression of Distractors, Explains the PD
with Small Search Displays
Dirk Kerzel and Nicolas Burra
Abstract
■Top–down control of attention allows us to resist attentional
capture by salient stimuli that are irrelevant to our current
goals. Recently, it was proposed that attentional suppression
of salient distractors contributes to top–down control by biasing
attention away from the distractor. With small search displays,
attentional suppression of salient distractors may even result
in reduced RTs on distractor-present trials. In support of at-
tentional suppression, electrophysiological measures revealed
a positivity between 200 and 300 msec contralateral to the
distractor, which has been referred to as distractor positivity
(PD). We reexamined distractor benefits with small search dis-
plays and found that the positivity to the distractor was followed
by a negativity to the distractor. The negativity, referred to as
N2pc, is considered an index of attentional selection of the
contralateral element. Thus, attentional suppression of the dis-
tractor (PD) preceded attentional capture (N2pc) by the distrac-
tor, which is at odds with the idea that attentional suppression
avoids attentional capture by the distractor. Instead, we suggest
that the initial “PD” is not a positivity to the distractor but rather a
negativity (N2pc) to the contralateral context element, suggest-
ing that, initially, the context captured attention. Subsequently,
the distractor was selected because, paradoxically, participants
searched all lateral target positions (even when irrelevant) be-
fore they examined the vertical positions. Consistent with this
idea, search times were shorter for lateral than vertical targets.
In summary, the early voltage difference in small search displays
is unrelated to distractor suppression but may reflect capture by
the context. ■
INTRODUCTION
The debate on bottom–up versus top–down control of atten-
tion has shifted from the question whether salient distractors
capture attention to the question under which conditions this
occurs (Liesefeld & Müller, 2019a; Theeuwes, 2018, 2019;
Büsel, Voracek, & Ansorge, 2018; Gaspelin & Luck, 2018b;
Awh, Belopolsky, & Theeuwes, 2012; Lamy, Leber, & Egeth,
2012). Importantly, capture was found to decrease in condi-
tions that promote precise target templates (Lamy, Carmel,
Egeth, & Leber, 2006; Folk, Remington, & Johnston, 1992).
For instance, Bacon and Egeth (1994) showed that atten-
tional capture by a salient color distractor disappeared
when observers were forced to search for the features
of a specific shape (feature search) instead of searching
for a divergent shape (singleton search). These results
suggest that enhancing the representation of the target
avoids attentional capture.
Recently, Gaspelin and Luck (2018b) argued for another
top–down control mechanisms. The signal suppression hy-
pothesis (Gaspelin & Luck, 2018b; Sawaki & Luck, 2010)
claims that salient stimuli capture attention unless they
are suppressed by a top–down mechanism. Strong evi-
dence for suppression was provided by the assessment of
visual processing at individual stimulus locations. Gaspelin,
Leonard, and Luck (2015) found that letter identification in
shape-based feature search was worse at the location of the
color distractor than at nontarget locations (see Figure 1),
demonstrating that distractor suppression may reduce
activation at the distractor location below baseline. In
the same vein, Gaspelin, Leonard, and Luck (2017) re-
ported that eye and reaching movements went less fre-
quently to the distractor than to nontarget locations.
For small search displays, distractor suppression may ef-
fectively eliminate the distractor from the set of searched
stimuli, resulting in shorter RTs on distractor-present than
distractor-absent trials (Gaspelin et al., 2015). Thus, the dis-
tractor decreased RTs, which is in contrast to more com-
mon variants of the additional singleton paradigm where
a distractor increases RTs because of attentional capture
(Theeuwes, 2018, 2019). However, distractor benefits dove-
tail nicely with research on an ERP, the PD. The PD is a
positivity contralateral to the distractor between 200 and
300 msec at posterior electrodes sites PO7/8 and is as-
sumed to reflect distractor suppression (Hickey, Di Lollo,
& McDonald, 2009). In previous studies, the magnitude
of the PD to the distractor was larger on trials with fast re-
sponses (Gaspar & McDonald, 2014; Jannati, Gaspar, &
Université de Genève
© 2020 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience X:Y, pp. 1–14
https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01535


McDonald, 2013), suggesting that the PD reflects a suppres-
sive mechanism that helps bias attention away from the
distractor.
Direct evidence for the contribution of distractor sup-
pression to the distractor benefit with small search
displays was provided by Gaspelin and Luck (2018a). In
their Experiment 1, participants performed feature search
on 70% of the trials. On 30% of trials, a letter identification
task was run to probe the distribution of attention at indi-
vidual stimulus locations. Replicating previous work
(Gaspelin et al., 2015), probe identification at the dis-
tractor location was worse than at nontarget locations.
Importantly, there was a PD to the color distractor, con-
firming that distractor suppression occurred.
Although the electrophysiological results from Gaspelin
and Luck (2018a) are consistent with the signal sup-
pression hypothesis, they are inconsistent with a previous
study using larger search displays. Barras and Kerzel
(2016) presented eight search items and compared sin-
gleton and feature search. In singleton search, the target
shape was unpredictable but unique among uniform non-
target shapes, forcing participants to search for a shape
that was different from the others. In contrast, the target
was predictable but shown among heterogeneous non-
target shapes in feature search, forcing participants to
search for a particular shape. Singleton and feature search
were similar to works by Gaspelin and colleagues (Gaspelin
& Luck, 2018a; Gaspelin et al., 2015, 2017). Singleton search
resulted in a 30-msec increase of RTs on distractor-present
trials and a PD to the distractor. In contrast, feature search
resulted neither in behavioral interference from the dis-
tractor nor in a PD to the distractor. Rather, the amplitude
of the N2pc to the target differed between singleton and
feature search, suggesting that target enhancement ac-
counted for the resistance to interference.
The goal of this study was to clarify whether atten-
tional suppression is a viable explanation for distractor
benefits in feature search with small set sizes. Recently,
Liesefeld and Müller (2019b) proposed that the small set
size combined with the heterogeneous nontarget shapes
in works by Gaspelin and colleagues (Gaspelin & Luck,
2018a; Gaspelin et al., 2015, 2017) represents a strong
departure from more common variants of the additional
singleton paradigm. In particular, Liesefeld and Müller
(2019b) proposed that their choice of set size and non-
target stimuli promoted systematic scanning over guid-
ance by priority. Guidance by priority relies on a spatial
map, which represents the selection history, top–down rel-
evance, and bottom–up saliency of elements in the search
array. Attention is thought to move to stimulus locations in
the order of decreasing priority, that is, the stimulus with
the highest priority is attended first (Theeuwes, 2010; Itti &
Koch, 2001). In contrast, systematic scanning of individual
or grouped stimuli (“clump scanning”) involves successive
shifts of attention across the search display where scan
paths are idiosyncratic. For instance, scan paths may be
defined by stimulus eccentricity so that stimuli close to the
fovea are scanned before peripheral stimuli (Woodman &
Luck, 1999). In the search displays by Gaspelin and col-
leagues, however, the location of the distractor feature
may determine the order of scanning by providing a tem-
plate for rejection (Tanda & Kawahara, 2019; Beck, Luck,
& Hollingworth, 2018; Arita, Carlisle, & Woodman, 2012).
An important point is that scanning involves systematic
shifts of attention, resulting in N2pc and PD components
that may pass for attentional capture or suppression.
Furthermore, we worried that the experimental design
in Gaspelin and Luck (2018a) may have affected atten-
tional selectivity. In Gaspelin and Luck’s experiments,
search and probe trials were mixed. Because participants
were asked to report as many letters as possible on probe
trials, there was an incentive to distribute attention evenly
across all stimulus locations. In contrast, pure search tasks
provide no incentive to attend to locations other than the
search target. Therefore, we decided to measure electro-
physiological correlates of target and distractor processing
in pure feature search with small set sizes.
EXPERIMENT 1
Experiment 1 replicated the first experiment in Gaspelin
and Luck (2018a), but without the letter probe task (see
Figure 1). The size and eccentricity of the stimuli were
closely matched. In particular, the stimuli were close to
fixation (at about 2° of visual angle), and the stimuli were
relatively small (about 1° in diameter). We asked partici-
pants to judge the orientation of a line inside the target
Figure 1. Illustration of experimental stimuli and conditions of interest. In
the example, the circle was the target, and the square, hexagon, and
diamond were nontargets. Nontargets are also referred to as context
elements. In the experiment, the target shape changed after blocks of trials
between circle and diamond. The distractor was the stimulus with a
different color. In the example, it was the red stimulus, but in the
experiment, the colors were swapped after 480 trials. The conditions of
interest for the analysis of ERPs are shown from left to right. The
schematics in the top row will be used to refer to these conditions in
the following graphs. (A) In the lateral target + no distractor condition, the
target was on the left or right and the distractor was absent. (B) In the
lateral target + vertical distractor condition, the target was on the left or
right and the target was on the vertical midline. (C) In the lateral target +
opposite distractor condition, the target was on the left or right and the
distractor was opposite. (D) In the vertical target + lateral distractor
condition, the distractor was shown on the left or right while the target
was on the vertical midline.
2
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Volume X, Number Y


stimulus (similar to the classic work by Theeuwes, 1992),
whereas Gaspelin and Luck (2018a) asked participants to
judge the location of a dot.
To isolate electrophysiological responses to the target and
distractor, we employed the logic proposed by Woodman
and Luck (2003) whereby stimuli presented on a vertical line
crossing the fixation point do not affect lateralized compo-
nents. Therefore, presenting the target on the vertical and
the distractor on a lateral position (see Figure 1D) allows
for the isolation of the distractor-related PD, which is the main
focus of the current investigation. Because stimulus posi-
tions were random, three other configurations of interest
occurred. When the target was on a lateral position, either
without distractor (Figure 1A) or with vertical distractor
(Figure 1B), we expected target-related N2pc compo-
nents. The N2pc is a more negative voltage at electrodes
contralateral to candidate target objects (Eimer, 1996;
Luck & Hillyard, 1994) and may indicate the transient
enhancement for high-level processing such as identi-
fication (Zivony, Allon, Luria, & Lamy, 2018). It occurs at
the same electrodes (PO7/8) and in the same time interval
(200–300 msec poststimulus) as the PD. The N2pc is also re-
ferred to as posterior contralateral negativity (Töllner, Müller,
& Zehetleitner, 2012; Töllner, Zehetleitner, Krummenacher,
& Müller, 2010).
Although the N2pc mostly occurs contralateral to can-
didate target objects, it may also occur contralateral to
distractors, indicating that attention was captured by
the distractor. The occurrence of the distractor-related
N2pc is contingent on the difficulty of the search task.
With unlimited presentation times, an N2pc to the distrac-
tor was reported, but in these studies, search was difficult
because the target was inconspicuous (Barras & Kerzel,
2017) or because target and distractor shape varied unpre-
dictably (Burra & Kerzel, 2013; Kiss, Grubert, Petersen, &
Eimer, 2012; Hickey, McDonald, & Theeuwes, 2006).
Furthermore, attentional capture by the distractor (i.e.,
an N2pc) may be followed by attentional suppression of
the distractor (i.e., a PD), suggesting that the PD reflects the
termination of the allocation of attention (Sawaki, Geng, &
Luck, 2012). We refer to the sequence of distractor-related
N2pc followed by a distractor-related PD as N2pc–PD switch.
A reliable N2pc–PD switch was reported when target and
distractor features were drawn from the same perceptual di-
mension (e.g., color target with color distractor; Liesefeld,
Liesefeld, Töllner, & Müller, 2017; Hilimire, Mounts, Parks,
& Corballis, 2011). For same-dimension distractors, initial
selection of the distractor may occur because the distractor
partially matched the target features. N2pc–PD switches were
also reported for cross-dimensional distractors when pre-
sentation times were short (i.e., shape target with color dis-
tractor; Feldmann-Wüstefeld, Brandhofer, & Schubö, 2016),
but sometimes the N2pc was absent and only a PD occurred
(Kiss et al., 2012). Because we used unlimited presentation
times and easy search, we do not expect an N2pc or an
N2pc–PD switch with lateral distractors. Rather, N2pc
components are only expected to lateral targets.
Furthermore, it is unlikely that the opposite distractor
condition (Figure 1C) yields a sequence of two N2pcs
where attentional capture by the distractor (a distractor-
related N2pc) is followed by selection of the target on
the opposite side (a target-related N2pc). The sequence
of distractor-related N2pc followed by a target-related
N2pc is referred to as N2pc flip. Initial reports of N2pc
flips with cross-dimensional distractors opposite to the
target (Hickey et al., 2006) were found to be unreliable
(Jannati et al., 2013; McDonald, Green, Jannati, & Di Lollo,
2013). However, reliable N2pc flips were observed for
distractors drawn from the same dimension as the target
(i.e., orientation target and orientation distractor; Liesefeld
et al., 2017).
In summary, based on the work by Gaspelin and Luck
(2018a), we expect a distractor-related PD, but not a distractor-
related N2pc. The main reasons are that stimulus presen-
tation in our study was unlimited and the target was easy
to find and drawn from a dimension different from the
distractor. In contrast, lateral targets are expected to re-
sult in an N2pc.
Methods
Participants
Sample size was based on Experiment 1 in Gaspelin and
Luck (2018a), which had 20 participants. Here, 24 first-
year psychology students from the University of Geneva
participated for class credit. Eleven data sets were
retained in the final sample (three men; age: M = 20,
SD = 3), and 13 were rejected (one man, age: M = 19,
SD = 1) because of eye movements (see below). The loss
of data sets was substantial, but the remaining number
was sufficient (i.e., the study was overpowered with 20
participants). The critical difference between conditions
with lateral distractor and lateral target had a Cohen’s
dz of about 0.9 in Gaspelin and Luck (2018a). A sample
size of 12 would be necessary to replicate this effect with
a power of .8 at an alpha of .05. The study was approved
by the ethics committee of the Faculty of Psychology and
Educational Sciences of the University of Geneva and was
carried out in accordance with the Code of Ethics of the
World Medical Association (Declaration of Helsinki).
Informed consent was given before the experiment.
Apparatus and Stimuli
Stimuli were displayed on a 21-in. CRT monitor with a re-
fresh rate of 85 Hz and a pixel resolution of 1280 × 1024
(horizontal × vertical), viewed at a distance of 80 cm.
The background was black, and the stimuli were either
red or green (16.5 cd/m2, CIE xyY coordinates: x = 0.628,
y = 0.338 for red and x = 0.294, y = 0.605 for green). A
white fixation cross with a luminance of 87 cd/m2 was pre-
sented in the center of the screen. The search display con-
sisted of a circle, a square, a diamond, and a hexagon. All
Kerzel and Burra
3


shapes were filled, similar to Gaspelin and Luck (2018a).
The shapes were presented at an eccentricity of 2° of visual
angle (center-to-center) on the vertical and horizontal
midlines. The circle had a diameter of 1.4°, and the di-
mensions of the remaining shapes (square, diamond,
and hexagon) were adjusted to have an equal area. The
mean number of lit pixels per shape was 4306 (SD = 14
pixels or 0.3%, range = 4290–4324 pixels). A vertical or
horizontal black line of 0.7° length was presented in the
center of each shape. Stroke width was 0.06°. The Psy-
chtoolbox (Kleiner et al., 2007; Brainard, 1997) was used
to run the experiment.
Electrophysiological Recording and Initial
Data Processing
An actiCHamp amplifier (Brain Products) with active
Ag/AgCl electrodes was used. Data were recorded using
the PyCorder software by Brain Products. In the filter set-
tings of the PyCorder software, we deactivated cutoffs
and the notch filter. Continuous EEG was sampled at
1000 Hz from 26 scalp electrodes and six additional elec-
trodes placed at the outer canthi of each eye, above and
below the right eye, and on each earlobe. Cz served as
online reference, and AFz served as ground site. The data
were analyzed using ERPLAB (Lopez-Calderon & Luck,
2014), an extension of EEGLAB (Delorme & Makeig,
2004). Raw EEG was re-referenced to the average ear-
lobes and filtered between 0.1 and 30 Hz with a bandpass
second-order Butterworth filter (roll-off 12db/octave,
command “pop_basicfilter” in ERP lab). The filter settings
matched those in Gaspelin and Luck (2018a). The differ-
ence between the left and right eye electrode constituted
the HEOG channel, and the difference between upper
and lower eye electrode constituted the VEOG channel.
The EEG was segmented into 500-msec epochs, extend-
ing from 100 msec before to 400 msec after stimulus on-
set. The first 100 msec served as baseline.
Procedure
Participants were asked to search for a specific shape (e.g.,
a circle) and to report the line orientation inside the
shape. To indicate line orientation, participants pressed
the left or right arrow key on a standard keyboard with
their right hand. Left and right responses were equi-
probable, and the key-to-response mapping was initially
counterbalanced across participants. Participants were
asked to maintain fixation on the central fixation cross,
to ignore the colors, and to respond as rapidly as possible
while keeping the error rate below 10%. After blocks of
40 trials, mean RT and the error rate were shown for at
least 5 sec, forcing participants to take a short break. At
the beginning of the experiment, participants practiced
the experimental task until they felt comfortable with it.
Practice trials were not recorded, but participants com-
pleted at least 30 trials.
A trial started with the presentation of the fixation
cross for a randomly selected duration between 0.85
and 1.1 sec. Then, the search display appeared. As in
Gaspelin and Luck (2018a), the search display stayed
on the screen until a response was registered. Only very
few trials had RTs shorter than 350 msec (M = 0.09 trials
per participant in Experiment 1 and M = 3 trials in
Experiment 2) so that offset transients caused by the
key-press were unlikely to affect ERPs. Choice errors
and late trials (RTs > 2 sec) were reported to the partic-
ipant by visual feedback.
On half of the trials, one nontarget shape had a color
different from the remaining stimuli (distractor-present
trials). On the other half, all four shapes had the same
color (distractor-absent trials). The placement of target
and distractor was random. To cancel out potential sen-
sory differences, the color (red or green) and target shape
(circle or diamond) changed after 480 trials. There were at
least 10 familiarization trials before data collection re-
sumed. The combination of color and target shape in
the first block was initially counterbalanced across partici-
pants. A total of 960 trials were run.
Results
The data from all experiments are available in the open
science framework at https://osf.io/ckhgs/?view_only=
8ab328c819c34d65b9db77cae1d6fda7.
Exclusion of Data Sets
Trials with behavioral errors and RTs slower than 2 sec
were excluded from analysis for both behavioral and
ERP analysis. Furthermore, individual trials in the ERP
analysis were rejected when blinks and vertical eye move-
ments (difference in VEOG channel exceeding ± 50 μV),
horizontal eye movements (steps in HEOG channel exceed-
ing ± 16 μV), and muscular or other artifacts (any electrode
exceeding ± 80 μV) occurred between 100 msec before
and 350 msec after stimulus onset. Thirteen data sets were
discarded because more than 25% of the trials were lost,
leaving 11 data sets for the final analysis. In the excluded
data sets, the mean behavioral error rate was 5% and the
mean rate of eye movement errors was 37%, but ERPs were
similar to Figure 2.
Behavior
Eleven data sets were analyzed. Trials with RTs slower
than 2 sec were excluded (less than 1%). Subsequently,
data were trimmed for each participant and condition by
removing trials with RTs that were more than 2.5 SDs
above the respective condition mean. This resulted in
the exclusion of additional 3% of the trials for the behav-
ioral analysis.
Individual mean RTs of correct responses on distractor-
present and -absent trials (480 trials each) were compared
4
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Volume X, Number Y


by paired t test. RTs on distractor-present trials were
30 msec shorter than on distractor-absent trials (743 vs.
773 msec), t(10) = 3.93, p = .003, Cohen’s d = 1.18. Choice
errors did not differ significantly (4% in both conditions),
p = .446.
Electrophysiology
After rejecting trials with electrophysiological artifacts,
behavioral errors, or RTs longer than 2 sec, 87% of the
trials of interest remained for analysis. The mean number
of trials per condition and participant was 210 trials for
lateral target + no distractor (range = 188–232, out of
240), 140 for lateral distractor + vertical distractor (range =
129–153, out of 160), 71 for lateral target + opposite dis-
tractor (range = 64–77, out of 80), and 139 for vertical
target + lateral distractor (range = 125–159, out of 160).
The 240 trials with vertical targets + no distractor and
the 80 trials with vertical target + opposite distractor were
not analyzed because they did not result in lateralized ERP
components. The ipsi- and contralateral potentials at elec-
trodes PO7/8 are shown in the top panels of Figure 2, and
the respective difference waves (obtained by subtracting
ipsi- from contralateral activity) are shown in the bottom
left panel of Figure 2.
Inspection of Figure 2 (bottom left) shows a biphasic
response in the vertical target + lateral distractor condi-
tion from about 170 to 350 msec. As this condition is the
focus of the current study, we selected the analysis inter-
vals accordingly. A 50-msec analysis window was placed
on the positive-going peak, which occurred in the early range
of the N2pc, at 209 msec. Another 50-msec analysis window
was placed on the negative-going peak, which occurred in
the late range of the N2pc, at 284 msec. The positive- and
negative-going peaks correspond to the PD and N2pc, re-
spectively. Peaks were determined after smoothing the
grand-average difference waves by a 50-msec sliding average.
Early N2pc Interval
We tested whether average voltage differences in the 50-msec
interval centered on 209 msec were significantly different
from zero. By one-sample t test, the positivity to lateral
distractors with vertical targets was significant (0.75 μV),
t(10) = 3.59, p = .005, Cohen’s dz = 1.08, consistent with
the occurrence of a PD as in Gaspelin and Luck (2018a).
To assure that the time window was indeed the N2pc in-
terval, we also tested the negativities to lateral targets for
significance. The critical p value was adjusted to control
the false discovery rate (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995).
One-sample t tests showed that the negativities to lateral
targets without distractor, with vertical distractor, and
with opposite distractor were significantly different from
zero, ts(10) > 2.9, ps < .014, Cohen’s dz > 0.9, suggesting
that the analysis interval corresponded to the early part of
the N2pc time window.
Late N2pc Interval
We tested whether the average voltage difference in the
50-msec interval centered on 284 msec was significantly
different from zero. Importantly, there was a significant
N2pc in the vertical target + lateral distractor condition
(−1.19 μV), t(10) = 4.47, p = .001, Cohen’s dz = 1.35, indi-
cating that the early positivity (PD) to the distractor was
followed by a late negativity (N2pc). Separate one-sample
t tests against zero confirmed that the late N2pc compo-
nents to lateral targets were significantly different from
zero in all conditions, ts(10) > 3.3, ps < .008, Cohen’s
dz > 0.99, suggesting that the analysis interval corre-
sponded indeed to the late part of the N2pc time window.
HEOG
HEOGs were calculated as the difference between
contra- and ipsilateral electrodes, similar to the N2pc,
and are plotted in Figure 2 (bottom right). We tested
weather the early PD and late N2pc to the distractor were
accompanied by changes in the HEOG, but neither differ-
ence was significantly different from zero, ps > .38.
Similarly, there were no significant differences to lateral
targets. However, the bottom right panel in Figure 2
shows that there was a tendency to look toward the lat-
eral target after about 350 msec.
Discussion
We reexamined distractor processing in feature search
with small search displays. Behaviorally, we replicated
Figure 2. Electrophysiological results from Experiment 1. The top
panels show the ERPs to lateral distractors and targets at ipsi- and
contralateral electrodes PO7/8. The bottom left panel shows the
difference waves between contra- and ipsilateral electrodes. The shaded
areas indicate the 50-msec averaging intervals corresponding to the
early and late N2pc. The bottom right panel shows the HEOG
difference waves where a negative deflection indicates an eye
movement toward the lateral stimulus. Epochs extended from −100
to 350 msec poststimulus in the analysis reported in the text, but the
graphs show the data until 400 msec.
Kerzel and Burra
5


the shorter RTs on distractor-present than distractor-
absent trials. However, our electrophysiological results
are not compatible with the idea that attentional sup-
pression of the distractor caused the behavioral benefit.
We replicated a contralateral positivity to the distractor in
the early N2pc interval, but the early positivity was fol-
lowed by a contralateral negativity to the distractor. As the
polar opposite of the N2pc–PD switch (e.g., Liesefeld et al.,
2017; Feldmann-Wüstefeld et al., 2016; Hilimire et al., 2011),
we observed that the PD turned into an N2pc. If we assume
that the early positivity and late negativity correspond to
distractor-related PD and N2pc components, respectively,
we must conclude that attentional suppression was fol-
lowed by attentional capture. According to the signal sup-
pression hypothesis (Gaspelin & Luck, 2018b; Sawaki &
Luck, 2010), the role of attentional suppression is to prevent
the involuntary capture of attention by salient elements.
Consequently, the observed sequence of attentional sup-
pression followed by attentional capture is incompatible
with the signal suppression hypothesis. Beyond signal
suppression, the PD–N2pc switch seems paradoxical. Why
would participants attend to the distractor after they sup-
pressed it? It is easier to find a functional explanation for
the N2pc–PD switch, where attentional capture by the dis-
tractor is followed by attentional suppression (Liesefeld
et al., 2017; Feldmann-Wüstefeld & Schubö, 2013; Hilimire
et al., 2011; Hickey et al., 2006) to terminate the erroneous
shift of attention (Sawaki et al., 2012). In the present case, it
is not clear what could be achieved by first suppressing and
then attending to the distractor. However, the results are
consistent with the idea of spatial scanning strategies
(Liesefeld & Müller, 2019b). Possibly, participants scanned
the sparse display starting opposite to the salient ele-
ment. Thus, the salient element may provide a template
for rejection (Beck et al., 2018; Arita et al., 2012).
Our results deviate from those of Gaspelin and Luck
(2018a), who found a distractor-related positivity, but no
negativity in their Experiment 1. We attribute the dis-
crepancy to differences in the distribution of attention
between a pure search task, where there was no benefit
of spreading attention, and mixed tasks, where it was
beneficial to also attend to non-target locations. Spread-
ing attention across nontarget locations optimizes perfor-
mance on the letter identification task where all stimuli in
the array were probed. Although our results deviate from
Experiment 1 in Gaspelin and Luck (2018a), results from
their Experiment 3 are very similar to ours. In their Ex-
periment 3, Gaspelin and Luck (2018a) presented a color
singleton on each trial. In separate blocks of trials, the
color singleton was either target or distractor. When
the color singleton was a distractor, the same sequence
of early PD followed by a late N2pc was observed (see
Figure 9C in Gaspelin & Luck, 2018a). Despite the sta-
tistical significance of the late N2pc, it was not discussed
by Gaspelin and Luck (2018a). Possibly, the lack of
distractor-absent trials in their Experiment 3 prevented
firm conclusions.
EXPERIMENT 2
Before we attempt to find an explanation for the paradoxical
PD–N2pc switch in Experiment 1, several methodologi-
cal issues need to be addressed. First, the orientation–
discrimination task in Experiment 1 was different from the
localization task in Gaspelin and Luck (2018a). In Ex-
periment 2, we therefore employed Gaspelin and Luck’s
localization task to avoid spurious effects of seemingly
small methodological details. Second, there was a large
number of excluded data sets in Experiment 1. Of 24 par-
ticipants, 13 were unable to maintain fixation during the
search task, resulting in many discarded trials. Possibly,
the small eccentricity of the stimuli and the unlimited pre-
sentation time made it difficult to refrain from looking at
the stimuli. In Gaspelin and Luck (2018a), only few data
sets were removed, and we suspect that their participants
had some experience with psychophysical tasks. In con-
trast, the first-year students in our experiments were
novices. Therefore, we decided to screen participants
for their ability to maintain fixation. It should be men-
tioned that the ERPs in the excluded data sets showed
the same PD–N2pc switch as in Figure 2. Third, target
shape and color were counterbalanced within each partic-
ipant in our study, whereas target shape and color were
counterbalanced across participants in Gaspelin and
Luck (2018a). Although interference from color distractors
is typically absent in feature search mode (Bacon & Egeth,
1994), it has been demonstrated that interference re-
emerges for about eight trials following a change of the
distractor color (Vatterott, Mozer, & Vecera, 2018; Vatterott
& Vecera, 2012). Because we had at least 10 familiarization
trials after target and distractor colors were swapped, it
is unlikely that our results were contaminated by the change
of distractor color. Nonetheless, we checked whether the
results after the color swap differed from those before the
color swap.
Methods
Stimuli and Task
The stimuli were the same as in Experiment 1, with the
exception that the line inside each shape was replaced by
a 0.08°-wide square at 0.5° to the left or right of the cen-
ter of the shape. The task of the participant was to indi-
cate the relative dot position in the target shape by
clicking on the corresponding left or right mouse button.
Participant Screening
We screened 46 students for their ability to maintain eye
fixation during the visual search task in a screening ses-
sion that preceded the main experimental session. An
EyeLink1000 desk-mounted eye tracker (SR Research
Ltd.) was used. After practice and calibration of the eye
tracker, participants performed two sets of 120 trials. A
saccade error was signaled to the participant if a saccade
6
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Volume X, Number Y


occurred during the 600 msec following the onset of the
search display. The standard EyeLink saccade criteria for
cognitive research were used (30°/sec velocity and
8000°/sec2 acceleration). We used the overall error rate
in the second block of trials to decide whether the par-
ticipant was invited to a second session with EEG re-
cording. The selection criterion was 25% errors, but three
exceptions occurred. One participant with 24% errors and
one with 22% were not motivated to come back, whereas
another with 27% errors was highly motivated and was
therefore invited back. Of 46 students, 26 were selected
for the EEG experiment (seven men, age: M = 19.5,
SD = 2.2), and 20 were rejected (five men, age: M =
19.9, SD = 1.6). The mean error rates in the second block
of trials were 14% (SD = 7%) and 41% (SD = 11%) for the
selected and rejected participants, respectively.
Results
Exclusion of EEG Data Sets
One data set was discarded because more than 25% of the
data were lost after artifact rejection. Two data sets were lost
because an earlobe electrode got loose during the experi-
ment and one recording session was interrupted for technical
reasons. Thus, 22 of 26 data sets were available for analysis.
Behavior
Trials with slow responses (less than 1%) and outliers (3%)
were excluded from analysis. Individual mean RTs of the
distractor-present and -absent trials were compared by
paired t test. RTs on distractor-present trials were 11 msec
shorter than on distractor-absent trials (587 vs. 597 msec),
t(21) = 3.96, p = .001, Cohen’s d = 0.84. Choice errors
did not differ significantly between distractor-present
and -absent trials (2% in both conditions), p = .422.
Electrophysiology
Data processing was as in Experiment 1. After rejecting
trials with electrophysiological artifacts, behavioral errors,
or RTs longer than 2 sec, 92% of the trials remained for
analysis. The mean number of trials per condition was
223 trials (range = 198–236) for lateral target + no dis-
tractor, 147 (range = 126–157) for lateral distractor + ver-
tical distractor, 74 (range = 62–80) for lateral target +
opposite distractor, and 147 (range = 126–158) for vertical
target + lateral distractor. The time intervals for analysis
were centered on 211 msec for the early N2pc and on
294 for the late N2pc. These times are close to those in
Experiment 1 (209 and 284 msec, respectively). The mean
ERPs are presented in Figure 3.
Early N2pc Interval
We tested whether average voltage differences in the
50-msec interval centered on 211 msec were significantly
different from zero. A one-sample t test against zero showed
that there was a positivity to lateral distractors with vertical
targets (1.07 μV), t(21) = 6.53, p < .001, Cohen’s dz = 1.39,
consistent with the occurrence of a PD. Further one-
sample t tests against zero showed that all target-related
negativities were significantly different from zero, ts(21) >
4.54, ps < .001, Cohen’s dz > 0.97, confirming that the anal-
ysis interval corresponded to the early N2pc.
Late N2pc Interval
We tested whether average voltage differences in the 50-msec
interval centered on 294 msec were significantly different
from zero. Critically, a one-sample t test against zero con-
firmed that the N2pc component was significant for la-
teral distractors with vertical targets (−0.81 μV), t(21) =
5.39, p < .001, Cohen’s dz = 1.15. Furthermore, the N2pc
components to lateral targets were significant in the
absence of a distractor (−0.99 μV) and with a vertical dis-
tractor (−0.88 μV), ts(21) > 4.68, ps < .001, Cohen’s dz >
1, suggesting that the analysis interval corresponded
indeed to the late N2pc. However, the N2pc to lateral tar-
gets with opposite distractor (0.02 μV), p = .904, was not
significant, which may be explained by the earlier onset
and offset of the N2pc in this condition.
HEOG
HEOGs are plotted in Figure 3 (bottom right). We con-
ducted one-sample t tests against zero for the early and
late N2pc interval but did not find significant differences,
ps > .173, suggesting that effects at electrodes PO7/8
were not contaminated by eye movements.
Effects of Color Swap
We split the data into the block preceding and following
the color swap. Each block had 480 trials. First, we
Figure 3. Electrophysiological results from Experiment 2. Conventions
are as in Figure 2.
Kerzel and Burra
7


checked whether the reduction of RTs in the presence of
a distractor changed from the first to the second block by
means of a 2 (distractor: present, absent) × 2 (block:
first, second) ANOVA. There were no effects involving
block. In particular, the interaction of distractor presence
and block was not significant, p = .728, suggesting that
the effect of distractor presence was unchanged after the
color swap. Second, we checked for effects of block in the
most important ERP results. Neither the early PD nor the late
N2pc to the lateral distractor differed between the first and
second blocks, ps > .434. Furthermore, the early PD and the
late N2pc to the lateral distractor were significantly dif-
ferent from zero in both blocks, ts(21) > 3.69, ps < .002,
Cohen’s dz > 0.78. Thus, there was no evidence to suggest
that changing the target shape and color had an effect.
Rather, our results are consistent with prior studies showing
that increased distractor interference after changes of the
distractor color subsides after a few trials (Vatterott et al.,
2018; Vatterott & Vecera, 2012). Similar results were ob-
tained in a reanalysis of Experiment 1.
Discussion
Experiment 2 features methodological improvements
and a larger sample compared with Experiment 1. We
used the same localization task as Gaspelin and Luck
(2018a) and screened participants for their ability to
maintain fixation. As a result, participants providing data
were trained on the task, which possibly accounts for the
shorter overall RTs in Experiment 2 (592 msec) compared
with Experiment 1 (758 msec), but differences between the
orientation and localization task may also contribute.
Importantly, we were able to replicate the electrophysio-
logical results from Experiment 1. After a PD to the distrac-
tor occurring at 211 msec poststimulus, we observed an
N2pc to the distractor at 294 msec. The PD–N2pc switch
had similar temporal characteristics as in Experiment 1
and was unaffected by the color swap occurring after half
of the trials.
The paradoxical PD–N2pc switch is hard to reconcile
with the signal suppression hypothesis because attentional
suppression (as indexed by a distractor-related PD) is as-
sumed to prevent attentional selection of the distractor
(as indexed by a distractor-related N2pc). However, we
observed a distractor-related PD that was followed by a
distractor-related N2pc. Because the current results differ
from those observed with larger search displays (Barras &
Kerzel, 2016), an account of the PD–N2pc switch is limited
to small search displays with heterogeneous shapes.
Liesefeld and Müller (2019b) predicted that this type of
search display may result in spatial scanning strategies as
opposed to guidance by priority. Possibly, scanning started
opposite to the distractor before the distractor itself was
scanned.
In general, it is unlikely that a waterproof explanation
of the PD–N2pc switch can be given. PD and N2pc occur
with opposite polarity at the same electrodes in the same
time interval. Therefore, a data-driven justification for la-
beling the voltage difference one way or the other is
missing. Following Gaspelin and Luck’s (2018a) lead,
we labeled the early positivity “distractor-related PD,”
but it could also be a “context-related N2pc.” That is,
the positivity to the distractor may in fact be a negativity
to the nontarget element opposite to the distractor, sug-
gesting that the context captured attention.
What could be gained by turning the interpretation of
the early voltage difference around? From the perspective
of ideal search behavior, it would be best to use the dis-
tractor to guide attention toward potentially response-
relevant context elements, as proposed in research on
templates for rejection (Tanda & Kawahara, 2019; Beck
et al., 2018; Arita et al., 2012). In the lateral distractor con-
dition, this behavior would result in an N2pc to the con-
text element opposite to the distractor.
Thus, we suggest that there were two N2pc compo-
nents in the lateral distractor condition, the first to the
context element opposite to the distractor and the sec-
ond to the distractor itself. The second N2pc is certainly
a deviation from optimality, as it makes no sense to select
the distractor. Therefore, the flip of the lateralized com-
ponent remains paradoxical. However, the flip may de-
rive from a particular search strategy in this paradigm.
We suggest that participants had a tendency to search lat-
eral before vertical positions. When there was a distractor
on a lateral position, search started on the opposite side,
as visible in a context-related N2pc (formerly distractor-
related PD). Because of the tendency to search both lat-
eral positions first, the distractor was attended, as visible
in a distractor-related N2pc, even though there was no
reason to do so.
To provide solid evidence for this account, it would be
necessary to measure the N2pc on single trials in the
condition with only a vertical target. In each trial, the
N2pc is expected to flip from left to right or the other
way around. Unfortunately, the N2pc represents the
mean across many trials and searches starting on the left
and right will cancel out. Therefore, ERPs cannot provide
a test of the proposed account. However, there is a sim-
ple behavioral prediction. If there was a tendency to at-
tend to lateral positions first, then RTs for lateral targets
should be shorter than for vertical targets. In contrast,
the original account where a distractor-related PD is
followed by distractor-related N2pc does not make this
prediction because both the PD and the N2pc are related
to a single response-irrelevant position.
REANALYSIS OF BEHAVIORAL DATA
We reanalyzed effects of spatial configuration on RTs in
more detail. The paradoxical succession of two N2pc com-
ponents predicts faster search times for targets on lateral
than vertical positions. In the previous analyses of RTs, we
opposed distractor-present and distractor-absent trials.
8
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Volume X, Number Y


Here, we separated trials according to the spatial configu-
ration of target and distractor. We separated lateral (left
and right) from vertical (top and bottom) target positions.
Additionally, we considered the relative distractor posi-
tion. If present, the distractor was either adjacent or oppo-
site to the target. It should be noted that lateralized ERPs
could not be analyzed for two of the conditions presented
here. Notably, there were no lateralized elements in the
vertical target + no distractor condition and in the vertical
target + opposite distractor condition. These conditions
are shown in gray in Figure 4. Because the task was differ-
ent in Experiment 1 and the sample size was small, data
from Experiment 1 is reported, but the main analysis con-
cerns Experiment 2.
Results
Mean RTs as a function of target and distractor configura-
tion are shown in Figure 4. Data from Experiments 1 and 2
are shown in the top and bottom panels, respectively.
Experiment 1
There were less than 1% late trials and 5% outliers. We
subjected mean individual RTs to a 2 (target position: lat-
eral, vertical) × 3 (relative distractor position: absent, ad-
jacent, opposite) repeated-measures ANOVA. RTs tended
to be shorter for lateral than for vertical targets (dif-
ference of 26 msec, 728 vs. 754 msec), F(1, 10) = 4.68,
p = .056, ηp
2 = .319. RTs without a distractor (760 msec)
were longer than RTs with a distractor adjacent (734 msec)
or opposite (729 msec) to the target, F(2, 20) = 8.34, p =
.002, ηp
2 = .455. The interaction was not significant, p =
.131. Running the same ANOVA on choice errors did not
yield any significant effects, ps > .214. The mean percent-
age of choice errors was 4%.
Experiment 2
There were less than 1% late trials and 4% outliers. RTs
were shorter with lateral than vertical targets (difference
of 24 msec, 574 vs. 598 msec), F(1, 21) = 34.26, p < .001,
ηp
2 = .62, which is consistent with our hypothesis that lat-
eral locations were searched before vertical locations. The
main effect of relative distractor position, F(2, 42) = 9.54,
p < .001, ηp
2 = .312, and the two-way interaction, F(2,
42) = 4.95, p = .012, ηp
2 = .191, were significant, show-
ing that the effect of relative distractor position differed
between lateral and vertical targets. For lateral targets,
RTs did not differ between adjacent and opposite dis-
tractors (blue vs. pink bar in Figure 4, 570 vs. 572 msec),
p = .397. In contrast, for vertical targets, RTs were
shorter when the distractor was adjacent than when it
was opposite (green vs. right gray bar in Figure 4, 586
vs. 604 msec), t(21) = 3.35, p = .003, Cohen’s d = 0.71.
More t tests involving the condition with lateral distrac-
tor and vertical target were carried out because previous
work implicitly assumed that RTs in the presence of a dis-
tractor are generally shorter, but effects of specific spatial
configurations were not evaluated. In particular, Gaspelin
and Luck (2018a) suggested that the PD to the lateral
distractor with vertical target explained why RTs were
shorter on distractor-present trials. In fact, RTs in this
condition were not different from the condition with
lateral target only (green vs. red bar in Figure 4, 586 vs.
579 msec), p = .216. An RT advantage only emerged
when it was compared with the condition with vertical tar-
get only (green vs. left gray bar, 586 vs. 603 msec), t(21) =
4.24, p < .001, Cohen’s d = 0.9. For vertical targets, how-
ever, RTs with opposite distractor were not different from
RTs with vertical target only (right vs. left gray bar, 604 vs.
603 msec), p = .953, suggesting that the presence of a
distractor did not always result in shorter RTs, even when
only one target position (vertical) was considered.
Running the same ANOVA as above on choice errors
did not yield any significant effects, ps > .165. The mean
percentage of choice errors was 2%.
Discussion
The most important result of the reanalysis is that search
times for lateral targets were shorter than for vertical tar-
gets. We had conjectured that the flip of the voltage dif-
ference with lateral distractor + vertical target represents
Figure 4. Behavioral results from Experiments 1 and 2. RTs (in msec)
are shown on the y axis, and the spatial configuration of target and
distractor is shown on the x axis. The target was lateral or vertical
while the distractor was absent, adjacent, or opposite to the target.
The configurations with lateral target or distractor are shown in the
same colors as in the analyses of ERPs. The configurations without
lateral element are shown in gray. Error bars show the
between-subject SEM.
Kerzel and Burra
9


a sequence of two N2pc components. The initial N2pc oc-
curs to the lateral context element, the second to the dis-
tractor, suggesting that the lateral positions are searched
exhaustively even if this does not represent optimal search
behavior. If lateral positions are searched before vertical
positions, RTs are expected to be shorter for lateral than
vertical targets. Data from both Experiment 1 and 2 con-
firm this assumption and lend some credibility to our
explanation.
EXPERIMENT 3
We argued that search behavior with small search dis-
plays (Gaspelin & Luck, 2018a) differs from the search
behavior with larger set sizes (Barras & Kerzel, 2016).
In particular, we suggested that search of horizontal po-
sitions precedes search of vertical positions. According to
Liesefeld and Müller (2019b), idiosyncratic scanning strat-
egies are promoted by small and heterogeneous displays
where the target is inconspicuous (see also Liesefeld,
Liesefeld, & Müller, 2019). In contrast, displays where
the target stands out are likely to be guided by the prior-
ity map. Experiment 3 tested the role of target saliency by
using the same displays, but with a different target as-
signment. Participants were asked to search for the salient
color singleton instead of the inconspicuous shape. We ex-
pect idiosyncratic scanning to disappear. Second, we
sought to rule out contributions of stimulus–response con-
gruency. Participants performed left or right mouse clicks in
response to the left or right position of the dot inside the
target shape. The congruency between the relative dot po-
sition and the response was the same irrespective of the
position of the target shape. However, the congruency be-
tween the position of the target shape and the response
differed between lateral and vertical positons. The lateral
position of the target shape may interfere with the re-
sponse when incongruent or facilitate the response when
congruent (Zhang, Zhou, di Pellegrino, & Ladavas, 2007;
Ansorge, 2003; Simon, 1969). In contrast, the vertical target
position does not overlap with the response and is there-
fore unlikely to result in interference or facilitation. Possibly,
the existence of stimulus–response congruency for lateral
positions contributed to the difference between lateral
and vertical target positions in Experiment 2. If so, we ex-
pect faster RTs with lateral than vertical target even for a
different search task. Otherwise, we may conclude that
stimulus-response correspondence played no role in our
findings.
Methods
Fifteen students participated (no men, age: M = 19.9,
SD = 1.4). The stimuli were as in Experiment 2, with the
exception that there was a color singleton on each trial.
Participants were asked to perform the localization task
on the dot inside the color singleton. Each shape (circle,
square, diamond, and hexagon) was equally likely to be
the color singleton. Eye fixation was checked for 400 msec
after stimulus onset. Participants worked through eight
blocks of 60 trials. Performance feedback was given after
each block and calibration was checked every other block.
Results
Mean RTs are shown in Figure 5. There were less than 1%
late trials and 9% fixation errors or blinks. A one-way (tar-
get position: left, right, top, bottom), repeated-measures
ANOVA showed a significant main effect, F(3, 42) = 8.7, p <
.001, ηp
2 = .383. RTs were about 20 msec longer when the
target was on the left (552 msec) compared with when it
was on the right, top, or bottom (529, 530, and 535 msec,
respectively). A follow-up ANOVA on the latter three posi-
tions showed no effect, p = .791, suggesting that only the
left position differed from the remaining positions. Running
the same analysis on choice errors also yielded a signifi-
cant main effect of position, F(3, 42) = 12.86, p < .001,
ηp
2 = .479, showing that more errors occurred for posi-
tions on the left (3%) and right (2%) than for positions
above (1%) and below (1%). A follow-up test showed that
more errors occurred on left and right target positions
when the relative dot position inside the target was incom-
patible with the target position relative to fixation (4% vs.
1%), t(15) = 4.32, p = .001, Cohen’s dz = 1.12. However,
choice errors were rare and no corresponding effects were
present in RTs.
Discussion
We examined effects of target position in color-based sin-
gleton search. Contrary to shape-based feature search in
Experiments 1 and 2, we found no advantage of lateral
positions over vertical positions. Rather, we observed
that search times for targets on the left were longer,
which is consistent with previous work on shape-based sin-
gleton search with larger search displays (i.e., eight items in
Carlei & Kerzel, 2018). With respect to the assumption that
Figure 5. Results from Experiment 3. RTs (in msec) are shown on the
y axis, and the position of the target is shown on the x axis. In this
experiment, the target was the stimulus with a different color while
stimulus shape was irrelevant.
10
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Volume X, Number Y


lateral stimuli are searched before vertical stimuli, we con-
clude that it may be limited to the specific task and stimuli
used in Experiments 1 and 2. Also, there is no reason to
believe that stimulus–response compatibility contributed
to the difference between lateral and vertical target posi-
tions in Experiments 1 and 2 because the same mapping
of stimulus to response was used in the present experi-
ment, yet no difference between lateral and vertical target
positions was observed in RTs.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
We investigated whether the distractor benefit in fea-
ture search with small search displays was the result of
attentional suppression as claimed by Gaspelin and Luck
(2018a). In feature search with a larger set size, neither a
PD nor an N2pc to the distractor was observed (Barras &
Kerzel, 2016). Rather, changes in the N2pc to the target
suggested that target enhancement—and not distractor
suppression—prevented capture by salient distractors. To
reconcile the divergent findings, we reexamined shape-
based feature search with small set size. Compared with
Gaspelin and Luck (2018a), our experiments present two
improvements. First, compared with their Experiment 1,
we did not interleave a search and a letter identification
task, so that our experiments isolate typical search behavior,
whereas mixing tasks may lead to biases in the distribution
of attention. Second, compared with their Experiment 3,
we presented both distractor-present and distractor-
absent trials. Besides replicating the early distractor-related
“PD,” we also found a late distractor-related N2pc. The latter
finding was also reported in Experiment 3 of Gaspelin and
Luck (2018a, see Figure 9C), but was not discussed, proba-
bly because the distractor-absent condition was missing.
The distractor-related “PD” and the following distractor-
related N2pc were observed in two experiments with
slightly different tasks (i.e., orientation discrimination in
Experiment 1 and dot localization in Experiment 2).
The most important conclusion from our findings is
that the early positive deflection is unlikely to reflect dis-
tractor suppression. According to the distractor suppres-
sion hypothesis (Gaspelin & Luck, 2018b; Sawaki & Luck,
2010), distractor suppression serves to prevent atten-
tional capture by salient elements. However, the sequence
of distractor-related PD and distractor-related N2pc would
suggest that suppression of the distractor preceded atten-
tional capture by the distractor, which is incompatible with
the distractor suppression hypothesis. With respect to the
original question, it seems unlikely that distractor benefits
with small search displays (Gaspelin & Luck, 2018a) result
from distractor suppression. Thus, it is not necessary to as-
sume that distractor suppression occurred with small set
sizes (Gaspelin & Luck, 2018a) whereas target enhance-
ment occurred with large set sizes (Barras & Kerzel,
2016). Rather, distractor suppression does not seem to be
involved in either case, pointing to target enhancement
(Barras & Kerzel, 2016; Bacon & Egeth, 1994; Folk et al.,
1992) as the reason for resistance to interference in feature
search.
Ambiguity of the PD
Although the distractor suppression hypothesis is un-
likely to account for the present results, there is a lot
of uncertainty regarding an alternative account. The big-
gest problem is that there is no data-driven way to distin-
guish a PD to the distractor from an N2pc to the context
element on the opposite side. We nonetheless explored
the hypothesis that the early distractor-related “PD” was
in fact an early context-related N2pc. We did not diverge
from the original interpretation of the late negativity,
which we still believe to be an N2pc to the distractor.
We suggest that the paradoxical succession of two N2pc
components was caused by participants’ search strategy.
In particular, we suggest that participants searched the
lateral positions before the vertical positions. When there
was a lateral distractor, search started opposite to the
distractor but, nevertheless, visited the distractor location.
This strategy is clearly not optimal, but may arise from
the small and heterogeneous search display (Liesefeld &
Müller, 2019b). Although ERPs cannot provide evidence
for our conjecture, we found that search times for lateral
targets were shorter than for vertical targets, consistent with
the idea that lateral positions are searched first. The prece-
dence of lateral positions may be specific to shape-based
feature search with small search displays, as we did not
replicate the results in a different search task using the
same displays (Experiment 3). Furthermore, it may be con-
jectured that the early and late deflections arise from the
averaging of trials that either show an early PD or a late
N2pc. To test this conjecture, we performed a median split
by RT and reanalyzed the ERPs. Previous research showed
that the PD is associated with faster search times, suggesting
that the PD occurs on trials with successful distractor re-
jection (Gaspar & McDonald, 2014; Jannati et al., 2013).
However, we found no significant effects of search time,
making it unlikely that the averaging of trials with either
successful (PD) or failed (N2pc) distractor rejection caused
the pattern of results.
How Robust Is Evidence for Suppression of
Salient Elements?
Although we admit that it is difficult to provide solid ev-
idence for the hypothesis that the positivity contralateral
to a distractor was in fact a negativity to the opposite con-
text element, one may wonder whether the evidence for
distractor suppression is any better. As the PD arises in
the same time window and at the same electrodes as
the N2pc, no data-driven distinction between distractor
suppression and context capture is possible. However,
the positivity contralateral to the distractor was univer-
sally interpreted as a PD. For instance, distractor-related
positivities were interpreted as PD in a variety of tasks
Kerzel and Burra
11


such as segmentation or detection tasks (Feldmann-
Wüstefeld & Vogel, 2019; Feldmann-Wüstefeld et al.,
2016; Feldmann-Wüstefeld & Schubö, 2013), compound
search tasks (Barras & Kerzel, 2017; Gaspar & McDonald,
2014; Burra & Kerzel, 2013; Jannati et al., 2013; Kiss et al.,
2012), or same–different tasks (Kerzel, Barras, & Grubert,
2018). In all these studies, however, there was a context
element opposite to the distractor to assure balanced
sensory processing. Therefore, it seems entirely possible
that the positivity to the distractor was an N2pc to the
context opposite the distractor. Under this assumption,
observers started to search the context instead of sup-
pressing the distractor, which represents a reasonable
search strategy because the target was never at the dis-
tractor location.
However, there are two strong arguments against our
interpretation. Notably, the PD has been observed without
nontarget elements on the opposite side (Hickey et al.,
2009) and the PD has been observed in the absence of dis-
tractors (Wang, van Driel, Ort, & Theeuwes, 2019). In the
study by Hickey et al. (2009), there was no stimulus oppo-
site to the distractor. That is, the distractor was the only
lateralized element when the target was on the vertical
midline. Asymmetries in early sensory components of
the EEG were avoided by making the distractor color iso-
luminant to the background. One may propose that the
absence of a stimulus opposite to the distractor made it
unlikely that the side opposite to the distractor was at-
tended. However, there is evidence that gaps in a search
array involuntarily capture attention (Kiss & Eimer, 2011).
Therefore, it cannot be excluded that attention was di-
rected at an empty region of space. Furthermore, Wang
et al. (2019) showed that a PD occurred to inconspicuous
nontargets at a location where the distractor occurred with
a high probability. In line with the reduced behavioral
interference to distractors at a high-probability location
(Allenmark, Zhang, Liesefeld, Shi, & Müller, 2019; Wang &
Theeuwes, 2018a, 2018b), the PD to nontarget locations
may indicate that there was anticipatory suppression of the
high-probability distractor location (see also van Moorselaar
& Slagter, 2019). However, we would like to argue that it is
also possible that attention was shifted opposite to the high-
probability distractor location. In both cases, a PD to the high-
probability location would result. Although we do not suggest
that all instances of distractor-elicited “PD” components are
instances of context-elicited N2pc components, we think
that this hypothesis has been neglected in the past lit-
erature. More research is needed to disentangle the two
processes.
Evidence from the Contingent Capture Paradigm
The hypothesis that the “PD” to the distractor was in fact
an N2pc to the context element receives more direct sup-
port from a related study using the modified spatial cue-
ing paradigm by Folk et al. (1992). In Posner-type cueing
paradigms (Posner & Cohen, 1984), it was observed that
RTs are shorter when a peripheral cue preceded the
target at the same location. Folk and Remington (1998)
clarified that cueing benefits are restricted to situations
where the features of the cue match the features of the
target. For instance, a red cue will result in cueing bene-
fits with a matching red target, but not with a nonmatch-
ing green target. Although RTs with nonmatching cues
are often equal at cued and uncued positions (Folk &
Remington, 1998), there are situations where nonmatch-
ing cues result in longer RTs at cued than at uncued lo-
cations (“same location costs”; Kerzel, 2019; Schoeberl,
Ditye, & Ansorge, 2018; Carmel & Lamy, 2014). In one
series of experiments, Schönhammer, Grubert, Kerzel,
and Becker (2016) inverted the colors of the cue and tar-
get displays. That is, the cue was in the color of the con-
text elements surrounding the target, whereas the context
elements surrounding the cue were in the color of the tar-
get. Therefore, the color of the cue context matched the
target, whereas the cue was nonmatching. A same-location
cost was observed for the cue, which was accompanied by
a “PD” to the cue, pointing to suppression of the cue as a
possible origin of the same-location costs. However, we
wondered whether the cue-related “PD” was in fact a
context-related N2pc. Effects of cue- and context-related
processing are confounded because the lateral cue always
appeared opposite to the context. To disentangle cue sup-
pression (i.e., a cue-related PD) from context capture (i.e.,
a context-related N2pc), Schönhammer, Becker, and
Kerzel (submitted for publication) introduced a neutral
element in the cue display. To isolate cue- and context-
related processing, a neutral element was placed on the
opposite side. We observed an N2pc to the context, but
no PD to the cue, suggesting that the context captured at-
tention, but the cue was not suppressed. These results are
consistent with the proposed capture of attention by the
context. However, it may not be possible to adapt the idea
of a neutral element to the present paradigm. In the mod-
ified cueing paradigm, characteristics of the cue display
may be changed without changing the main search task,
because the cue and search displays are temporally sep-
arated. In the present paradigm, introducing a neutral
stimulus (e.g., a gray item) would change the search task
considerably because the color distractor would no longer
be the only element with a different color.
Summary
To sum up, this study investigated whether distractor
suppression occurred in shape-based feature search with
small display size. Previously, the occurrence of a positiv-
ity contralateral to a color distractor, the PD, was taken as
evidence in favor of this hypothesis. We reexamined this
situation with a number of methodological improvements.
Importantly, we found a sequence of ERPs that is incom-
patible with the idea of distractor suppression. The “PD” to
the distractor was followed by an N2pc to the distractor,
which is at odds with the idea that distractor suppression
12
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Volume X, Number Y


prevents attentional capture by the distractor. We suggest
that the paradoxical flip of the contralateral voltage differ-
ence was due to a search strategy that is idiosyncratic to
the task and display type. Participants searched lateral
items before vertical items, which reduced search times
for lateral compared with vertical targets. When there
was a lateral distractor, search started opposite to the
distractor, as visible in an early context-related N2pc, and
continued at the distractor location, as visible in a late
distractor-related N2pc. Thus, we suggest that the early
“PD” was in fact a context-related N2pc. Although more ev-
idence is needed to confirm our interpretation, it provides
a reasonable alternative to the distractor suppression the-
ory, which fails to account for the data.
Acknowledgments
D. K. was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation
100019_182146. We wish to thank Silvia Cavelti, Heeral Gandhi,
and Paulo Dos Santos Romao for helping with data collection.
Reprint requests should be sent to Dirk Kerzel, Faculté de
Psychologie et des Sciences de l’Éducation, Université de
Genève, 40 Boulevard du Pont d’Arve, 1205 Genève, Switzerland,
or via e-mail: dirk.kerzel@unige.ch.
REFERENCES
Allenmark, F., Zhang, B., Liesefeld, H. R., Shi, Z., & Müller, H. J.
(2019). Probability cueing of singleton-distractor regions in
visual search: The locus of spatial distractor suppression is
determined by colour swapping. Visual Cognition, 27,
576–594.
Ansorge, U. (2003). Influences of response-activating stimuli
and passage of time on the Simon effect. Psychological
Research, 67, 174–183.
Arita, J. T., Carlisle, N. B., & Woodman, G. F. (2012). Templates
for rejection: Configuring attention to ignore task-irrelevant
features. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 38, 580–584.
Awh, E., Belopolsky, A. V., & Theeuwes, J. (2012). Top–down
versus bottom–up attentional control: A failed theoretical
dichotomy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16, 437–443.
Bacon, W. F., & Egeth, H. E. (1994). Overriding stimulus-driven
attentional capture. Perception & Psychophysics, 55,
485–496.
Barras, C., & Kerzel, D. (2016). Active suppression of salient-
but-irrelevant stimuli does not underlie resistance to visual
interference. Biological Psychology, 121, 74–83.
Barras, C., & Kerzel, D. (2017). Salient-but-irrelevant stimuli
cause attentional capture in difficult, but attentional
suppression in easy visual search. Psychophysiology, 54,
1826–1838.
Beck, V. M., Luck, S. J., & Hollingworth, A. (2018). Whatever you
do, don’t look at the…: Evaluating guidance by an exclusionary
attentional template. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 44, 645–662.
Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false
discovery rate: A practical and powerful approach to multiple
testing. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B:
Methodological, 57, 289–300.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433–436.
Burra, N., & Kerzel, D. (2013). Attentional capture during visual
search is attenuated by target predictability: Evidence from
the N2pc, Pd, and topographic segmentation.
Psychophysiology, 50, 422–430.
Büsel, C., Voracek, M., & Ansorge, U. (2018). A meta-analysis of
contingent-capture effects. Psychological Research. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00426-018-1087-3.
Carlei, C., & Kerzel, D. (2018). Stronger interference from
distractors in the right hemifield during visual search.
Laterality, 23, 152–165.
Carmel, T., & Lamy, D. (2014). The same-location cost is
unrelated to attentional settings: An object-updating account.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 40, 1465–1478.
Delorme, A., & Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: An open source
toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including
independent component analysis. Journal of Neuroscience
Methods, 134, 9–21.
Eimer, M. (1996). The N2pc component as an indicator of
attentional selectivity. Electroencephalography and Clinical
Neurophysiology, 99, 225–234.
Feldmann-Wüstefeld, T., Brandhofer, R., & Schubö, A. (2016).
Rewarded visual items capture attention only in
heterogeneous contexts. Psychophysiology, 53, 1063–1073.
Feldmann-Wüstefeld, T., & Schubö, A. (2013). Context
homogeneity facilitates both distractor inhibition and target
enhancement. Journal of Vision, 13, 11.
Feldmann-Wüstefeld, T., & Vogel, E. K. (2019). Neural evidence
for the contribution of active suppression during working
memory filtering. Cerebral Cortex, 29, 529–543.
Folk, C. L., & Remington, R. W. (1998). Selectivity in distraction
by irrelevant featural singletons: Evidence for two forms of
attentional capture. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 24, 847–858.
Folk, C. L., Remington, R. W., & Johnston, J. C. (1992).
Involuntary covert orienting is contingent on attentional
control settings. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 18, 1030–1044.
Gaspar, J. M., & McDonald, J. J. (2014). Suppression of salient
objects prevents distraction in visual search. Journal of
Neuroscience, 34, 5658–5666.
Gaspelin, N., Leonard, C. J., & Luck, S. J. (2015). Direct
evidence for active suppression of salient-but-irrelevant
sensory inputs. Psychological Science, 26, 1740–1750.
Gaspelin, N., Leonard, C. J., & Luck, S. J. (2017). Suppression of
overt attentional capture by salient-but-irrelevant color
singletons. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 79,
45–62.
Gaspelin, N., & Luck, S. J. (2018a). Combined
electrophysiological and behavioral evidence for the
suppression of salient distractors. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 30, 1265–1280.
Gaspelin, N., & Luck, S. J. (2018b). The role of inhibition in
avoiding distraction by salient stimuli. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 22, 79–92.
Hickey, C., Di Lollo, V., & McDonald, J. J. (2009).
Electrophysiological indices of target and distractor
processing in visual search. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 21, 760–775.
Hickey, C., McDonald, J. J., & Theeuwes, J. (2006).
Electrophysiological evidence of the capture of visual
attention. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 604–613.
Hilimire, M. R., Mounts, J. R. W., Parks, N. A., & Corballis, P. M.
(2011). Dynamics of target and distractor processing in visual
search: Evidence from event-related brain potentials.
Neuroscience Letters, 495, 196–200.
Itti, L., & Koch, C. (2001). Computational modelling of visual
attention. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 194–203.
Kerzel and Burra
13


Jannati, A., Gaspar, J. M., & McDonald, J. J. (2013). Tracking
target and distractor processing in fixed-feature visual
search: Evidence from human electrophysiology. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 39, 1713–1730.
Kerzel, D. (2019). The precision of attentional selection is
far worse than the precision of the underlying memory
representation. Cognition, 186, 20–31.
Kerzel, D., Barras, C., & Grubert, A. (2018). Suppression of
salient stimuli inside the focus of attention. Biological
Psychology, 139, 106–114.
Kiss, M., & Eimer, M. (2011). The absence of a visual stimulus
can trigger task-set-independent attentional capture.
Psychophysiology, 48, 1426–1433.
Kiss, M., Grubert, A., Petersen, A., & Eimer, M. (2012). Attentional
capture by salient distractors during visual search is determined
by temporal task demands. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
24, 749–759.
Kleiner, M., Brainard, D. H., Pelli, D., Ingling, A., Murray, R., &
Broussard, C. (2007). What’s new in Psychtoolbox-3? Perception,
36, 1–16.
Lamy, D., Carmel, T., Egeth, H. E., & Leber, A. B. (2006). Effects
of search mode and intertrial priming on singleton search.
Perception & Psychophysics, 68, 919–932.
Lamy, D., Leber, A. B., & Egeth, H. E. (2012). Selective attention.
In A. F. Healy & R. W. Proctor (Eds.), Comprehensive
handbook of psychology: Vol. 4. Experimental psychology
(pp. 265–294). New York: Wiley.
Liesefeld, H. R., Liesefeld, A. M., & Müller, H. J. (2019). Distractor-
interference reduction is dimensionally constrained. Visual
Cognition, 27, 247–259.
Liesefeld, H. R., Liesefeld, A. M., Töllner, T., & Müller, H. J. (2017).
Attentional capture in visual search: Capture and post-capture
dynamics revealed by EEG. Neuroimage, 156, 166–173.
Liesefeld, H. R., & Müller, H. J. (2019a). Distractor handling via
dimension weighting. Current Opinion in Psychology, 29,
160–167.
Liesefeld, H. R., & Müller, H. J. (2019b). A theoretical attempt to
revive the serial/parallel-search dichotomy. Attention,
Perception, & Psychophysics. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13414-
019-01819-z.
Lopez-Calderon, J., & Luck, S. J. (2014). ERPLAB: An open-
source toolbox for the analysis of event-related potentials.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 213.
Luck, S. J., & Hillyard, S. A. (1994). Spatial filtering during visual
search: Evidence from human electrophysiology. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 20, 1000–1014.
McDonald, J. J., Green, J. J., Jannati, A., & Di Lollo, V. (2013). On
the electrophysiological evidence for the capture of visual
attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 39, 849–860.
Posner, M. I., & Cohen, Y. (1984). Components of visual
orienting. In H. Bouma & D. G. Bouwhuis (Eds.), Attention
and performance X (pp. 531–556). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Sawaki, R., Geng, J. J., & Luck, S. J. (2012). A common neural
mechanism for preventing and terminating the allocation of
attention. Journal of Neuroscience, 32, 10725–10736.
Sawaki, R., & Luck, S. J. (2010). Capture versus suppression of
attention by salient singletons: Electrophysiological evidence
for an automatic attend-to-me signal. Attention, Perception,
& Psychophysics, 72, 1455–1470.
Schoeberl, T., Ditye, T., & Ansorge, U. (2018). Same-location
costs in peripheral cueing: The role of cue awareness and
feature changes. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 44, 433–451.
Schönhammer, J. G., Becker, S. I., & Kerzel, D. (submitted for
publication). Attentional capture by context cues, not
inhibition of cue singletons, explains same location costs.
Schönhammer, J. G., Grubert, A., Kerzel, D., & Becker, S. I.
(2016). Attentional guidance by relative features: Behavioral
and electrophysiological evidence. Psychophysiology, 53,
1074–1083.
Simon, J. R. (1969). Reactions toward the source of stimulation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 81, 174–176.
Tanda, T., & Kawahara, J. I. (2019). Association between cue
lead time and template-for-rejection effect. Attention,
Perception, & Psychophysics, 81, 1880–1889.
Theeuwes, J. (1992). Perceptual selectivity for color and form.
Perception & Psychophysics, 51, 599–606.
Theeuwes, J. (2010). Top–down and bottom–up control of
visual selection. Acta Psychologica, 135, 77–99.
Theeuwes, J. (2018). Visual selection: Usually fast and
automatic; seldom slow and volitional; a reply to
commentaries. Journal of Cognition, 1, 21.
Theeuwes, J. (2019). Goal-driven, stimulus-driven, and history-
driven selection. Current Opinion in Psychology, 29, 97–101.
Töllner, T., Müller, H. J., & Zehetleitner, M. (2012). Top–down
dimensional weight set determines the capture of visual
attention: Evidence from the PCN component. Cerebral
Cortex, 22, 1554–1563.
Töllner, T., Zehetleitner, M., Krummenacher, J., & Müller, H. J.
(2010). Perceptual basis of redundancy gains in visual pop-
out search. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 137–150.
van Moorselaar, D., & Slagter, H. A. (2019). Learning what is
irrelevant or relevant: Expectations facilitate distractor
inhibition and target facilitation through distinct neural
mechanisms. Journal of Neuroscience, 39, 6953–6967.
Vatterott, D. B., Mozer, M. C., & Vecera, S. P. (2018). Rejecting
salient distractors: Generalization from experience. Attention,
Perception, & Psychophysics, 80, 485–499.
Vatterott, D. B., & Vecera, S. P. (2012). Experience-dependent
attentional tuning of distractor rejection. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 19, 871–878.
Wang, B., & Theeuwes, J. (2018a). Statistical regularities
modulate attentional capture. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 44,
13–17.
Wang, B., & Theeuwes, J. (2018b). Statistical regularities
modulate attentional capture independent of search strategy.
Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 80, 1763–1774.
Wang, B., van Driel, J., Ort, E., & Theeuwes, J. (2019).
Anticipatory distractor suppression elicited by statistical
regularities in visual search. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 31, 1535–1548.
Woodman, G. F., & Luck, S. J. (1999). Electrophysiological
measurement of rapid shifts of attention during visual search.
Nature, 400, 867–869.
Woodman, G. F., & Luck, S. J. (2003). Serial deployment of
attention during visual search. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 29,
121–138.
Zhang, D., Zhou, X., di Pellegrino, G., & Ladavas, E. (2007).
Spatial coding for the Simon effect in visual search.
Experimental Brain Research, 176, 616–629.
Zivony, A., Allon, A. S., Luria, R., & Lamy, D. (2018). Dissociating
between the N2pc and attentional shifting: An attentional
blink study. Neuropsychologia, 121, 153–163.
14
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience
Volume X, Number Y


