ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Detecting signage and doors for blind navigation and wayﬁnding
Shuihua Wang • Xiaodong Yang • Yingli Tian
Received: 18 September 2012 / Revised: 26 November 2012 / Accepted: 19 January 2013 / Published online: 6 February 2013
 Springer-Verlag Wien 2013
Abstract
Signage plays a very important role to ﬁnd
destinations in applications of navigation and wayﬁnding.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework to detect
doors and signage to help blind people accessing unfa-
miliar indoor environments. In order to eliminate the
interference information and improve the accuracy of
signage detection, we ﬁrst extract the attended areas using
a saliency map. Then the signage is detected in the attended
areas using a bipartite graph matching. The proposed
method can handle multiple signage detection. Further-
more, in order to provide more information for blind users
to access the area associated with the detected signage, we
develop a robust method to detect doors based on a geo-
metric door frame model which is independent to door
appearances. Experimental results on our collected datasets
of indoor signage and doors demonstrate the effectiveness
and efﬁciency of our proposed method.
1 Introduction
Based on the study of the World Health Organization
(WHO), there were about 161 million visually impaired
people around the world in 2002, about 2.6 % of the total
population. Among these statistics, 124 million had low
vision and 37 million were blind (Kocur et al. 2004).
Robust and efﬁcient indoor object detection can help
people with severe vision impairment to independently
access unfamiliar indoor environments and avoid dangers
(Baker 2010). Signage and other visual information pro-
vide important guidance in ﬁnding a route through a
building by showing the direction and location of the
desired
end-point.
Visual
information
is
particularly
important to distinguish similar objects such as elevators,
bathrooms, exits, and normal doors. There are two cate-
gories of visual information: (1) directional and locational
signage and (2) objects (e.g., elevators, bathrooms, etc.). A
signage may include the text with or without an arrow.
Figure 1 shows some examples of directional and loca-
tional signage of indoor environments.
Object detection is a computer vision technique that
detects instances of a priori objects of a certain class (such
as faces, signs, buildings, etc.) in digital images and videos
captured by cameras (Neves et al. 2011). Camera-based
indoor signage detection is a challenging problem due to
the following factors: (1) large variations of appearance
and design (shape, color, texture, etc.) of signage in dif-
ferent buildings and (2) large variations in the camera view
and image resolution of signage due to changes in position
and distance between the blind user with wearable cameras
and the targeted signage.
Object detection and recognition is a fundamental
component for scene understanding. The human visual
system is powerful, selective, robust, and fast (Kreiman
2008). It is not only very selective, which allows us to
distinguish among very similar objects, such as the faces of
identical twins, but also robust enough to classify same
category objects with large variances (e.g., changes of
position, scale, rotation, illumination, color, occlusion, and
many other properties). Research shows that the human
S. Wang  X. Yang  Y. Tian (&)
Department of Electrical Engineering,
The City College of New York, CUNY,
New York, NY 10031, USA
e-mail: ytian@ccny.cuny.edu
S. Wang
e-mail: swang15@ccny.cuny.edu
X. Yang
e-mail: xyang02@ccny.cuny.edu
123
Netw Model Anal Health Inform Bioinforma (2013) 2:81–93
DOI 10.1007/s13721-013-0027-9


visual system can discriminate among at least tens of
thousands of different object categories (Biederman 1987).
Object recognition processes in the human visual system
are also very fast: it can take as little as 100–200 ms (Hung
et al. 2005; Potter and Levy 1969; Thorpe et al. 1996).
However, it is extremely difﬁcult to build robust and
selective computer vision algorithms for object recognition
which can handle very similar objects or objects with large
variations. For example, state-of-the-art object detection
methods require hundreds or thousands of training exam-
ples and very long durations to learn visual models of one
object category (Schneiderman and Kanade 2000; Viola
and Jones 2001; Weber et al. 2000).
Many disability and assistive technologies have been
developed to assist people who are blind or visually
impaired. The vOICe vision technology for the totally blind
offers sophisticated image-to-sound renderings using a live
camera The Smith-Kettlewell
Eye Research Institute
developed a series of camera phone-based technological
tools and methods for the understanding, assessment, and
rehabilitation of blindness and visual impairment (Iva-
nchenko et al. 2008a, b; Manduchi et al. 2008; Shen and
Coughlan 2007), such as text detection (Shen and Cough-
lan 2007), crosswatch (Ivanchenko 2008a, b), and way-
ﬁnding (Manduchi 2008). To help the visually impaired,
Zandifar et al. (2002) used one head-mounted camera
together with existing OCR techniques to detect and rec-
ognize text in the environment and then convert the text to
speech. Everingham et al. (2003) developed a wearable
mobility aid for people with low vision using scene clas-
siﬁcation in a Markov random ﬁeld model framework.
They segmented an outdoor scene based on color infor-
mation and then classiﬁed the regions of sky, road, build-
ings, etc. Shoval et al. discussed the use of mobile robotics
technology in the GuideCane device, a wheeled device
pushed ahead of the user via an attached cane for the blind
to avoid obstacles. When the GuideCane detects an
obstacle it steers around it. The user immediately feels this
steering action and can follow the GuideCane’s new path.
Pradeep et al. (2008) describes a stereo-vision based
algorithm that estimates the underlying planar geometry of
the 3D scene to generate hypotheses for the presence of
steps. Recently, we have developed a number of technol-
ogies to assist people who are visually impaired including
navigation and wayﬁnding (Tian et al. 2012; Yang et al.
2010), clothing pattern and color matching and recognition
(Yang and Yuan 2011; Yuan et al. 2011), banknote rec-
ognition (Hasanuzzaman et al. 2011), text reading (Yi and
Tian 2011, 2012), signage detection (Wang and Tian 2011;
Wang 2012), etc. Although many efforts have been made,
how to apply this vision technology to help blind people
understand their surroundings is still an open question.
Detection of signage and doors can help blind people to
ﬁnd their destinations in unfamiliar environments. As
illustrated in Fig. 2, in this paper, we propose a new
framework based on camera-captured visual information to
provide guidance for blind people in unfamiliar indoor
environments. The proposed framework including two
main components: (1) signage detection by combining
saliency map-based attended area extraction and bipartite
graph matching-based signage recognition and (2) door
detection based on a geometric door frame model by
combining edges and corners. The hardware includes a
camera, a microphone, a portable computer, and a speaker
connected by Bluetooth for audio description of detection
results. The user can control the system by speech input via
microphone.
An earlier version of this paper can be found in (Wang
and Tian 2011). Compared to our previous work, there are
two major extensions whose merit being highlighted.
•
We recognize more types of signage. In this extended
version, we recognize total of 9 categories of signage
including three types of bathroom signs (Men, Women,
and Disable), two types of elevator buttons (Open and
Close), and 4 types of direction signs (Up, Down, Left,
and Right).
•
We add a new section of door detection to provide the
entrance information for the blind users accessing the
destinations associated with the detected signage.
The paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 describes the
methodology of signage detection. Sect. 3 introduces the
(b)
(a)
Fig. 1 Typical indoor signage:
a directional signage and
b locational signage
82
S. Wang et al.
123


door detection method based on a general door geometric
model. Sect. 4 analyzes experimental results and demon-
strates the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the proposed
algorithm. Sect. 5 concludes the paper and lists the future
research directions.
2 Method of indoor signage detection
Scholars tend to combine the window-sliding technique
with the classiﬁer to detect regions of an image at all
locations and scales that contain the given objects. How-
ever, the window-sliding method suffers from two short-
comings (Tsao et al. 2010): (1) high processing time and
(2) inaccuracy of detection results due to different back-
grounds. Therefore, we propose a new method to detect
indoor signage which ﬁrst employs the saliency map (Leyk
et al. 2006; Shi and Yang 2007) to extract attended areas,
and then applies bipartite graphic matching (Makino et al.
2002; Riesen and Bunke 2009; Zhang and Wu 2008) to
recognize indoor signage only at the attended areas instead
of the whole image, which can increase the accuracy and
reduce the computation cost. Our signage detection method
consists of two phases as shown in Fig. 3. In the ﬁrst phase,
attended areas are detected via saliency map based on
color, intensity, and orientation. Then, the scaled patterns
are detected within attended areas using bipartite graph
matching. To localize the patterns, a window-sliding
method is employed to search the attended areas.
2.1 Building image saliency maps
Saliency maps are used to represent the conspicuity at
every location in the visual ﬁeld by a scalar quantity and to
guide the selection of attended locations based on the
spatial distribution of saliency (Davies et al. 2006). In
analogy to the center–surround representations of elemen-
tary visual features, bottom-up saliency is thus determined
by how different a stimulus is from its surroundings, in
many sub-modalities and at many scales (Park et al. 2002).
Saliency at a given location is determined primarily by how
different this location is from its surroundings in color,
orientation, motion, depth, etc.
As shown in Fig. 4, the different visual features that
contribute to attentive selection of a stimulus (color,
intensity, and orientation) are combined into one saliency
map. The saliency map which integrates the normalized
information from the individual feature maps into one
global measure of conspicuity. The detailed procedures are
discussed in following sections.
2.1.1 Initialization
We ﬁrst resize the input color images at 640 9 480 reso-
lution. Then, for each image, nine spatial scales are created
using dyadic Gaussian pyramids, which progressively low-
pass ﬁlter and sub-sample the input image, yielding hori-
zontal and vertical image-reduction factors ranging from
1:1 to 1:256 in eight octaves.
(c)
(b)
(a)
Fig. 2 Query-based signage
and door detection by a
wearable camera mounted on a
pair of sunglasses. a A blind
user is looking for a bathroom,
b ‘‘WOMEN’’ bathroom
signage and door detection, and
c audio feedback is provided to
the user
Input 
Image
Saliency 
Map
Attended 
Area
Phase 1
Phase 2
Window 
Sliding
Signage 
Location
Signage templates 
queried by blind user
Fig. 3 Flow chart of the
proposed algorithm for indoor
signage detection
Detecting signage and doors for blind navigation
83
123


We compute saliency maps based on intensity, color,
and orientation for each pixel by a linear ‘‘center-sur-
rounded’’ operation similar to visual receptive ﬁelds.
Center–surround feature extraction is implemented in the
function of the difference between ﬁne and coarser scales;
the center is a pixel at the scales c 2 f2; 3; 4g, and the
surround is a pixel at scale s = c ? d, with d 2 f3; 4g. The
across-scale difference between two maps is gained by
interpolation to the ﬁner scale and point-by-point subtrac-
tion. Using several scales for both c and d = s-c yields
truly multi-scale feature extraction, by including different
size ratios between the centers and surround regions.
2.1.2 Intensity-based saliency map
With r, g, and b being the red, green, and blue channels of the
input image, respectively, an intensity image I is achieved as
I = (r ? g ? b)/3. Here I is used to create a Gaussian pyr-
amid I(r), where r 2 0; 1; 2; . . .8
f
g denotes the scale. The r,
g, and b channelsare normalized by I in order to decouple hue
from intensity. However, the hue variations are not per-
ceivable at very low luminance (and hence are not salient), so
normalization is only applied at the locations where I is
larger than 10 % of its maximum over the entire image, and
other locations yield zero. Four broadly tuned color channels
are created: R = r-(g ? b)/2 for red, G = g-(r ? b)/2 for
green, B = b-(r ? g)/2 for blue, and Y = (r ? g)/2-|r-
g|/2-b for yellow, and negative values are set to zero for the
R, G, B, and Y values gained from above equations. Four
Gaussian pyramids RðrÞ, GðrÞ, BðrÞ, and YðrÞ are created
from these color channels.
Center–surround differences between a ‘center’ ﬁne
scale c and a ‘surround’ coarser scale s yield the feature
maps. The ﬁrst group of feature maps is concerned with
intensity contrast, which is detected by neurons sensitive
either to dark centers on bright surrounds or to bright
centers on dark surrounds. In this paper, both types of
sensitivities are simultaneously computed using a rectiﬁ-
cation in six maps I(c,s).
Iðc; sÞ ¼ jIðcÞ  IðsÞj
ð1Þ
2.1.3 Color-based saliency map
The second group of saliency maps is similarly built for the
color channels, which in cortex are represented by a so-
called color double-opponent system: in the center of their
receptive ﬁelds, neurons are excited by one color such as red
and inhibited by another such as green, while the converse is
true in the surround (Shokoufandeh 1999). Such spatial and
chromatic opponency exists for the red/green, green/red,
blue/yellow, and yellow/blue color pairs in human primary
visual cortex. Accordingly, maps RG(c,s) are created in the
function to simultaneously account for red/green and
green/red double opponency Eq. (2) and BY(c,s) for
blue/yellow and yellow/blue double opponency Eq. (3).
RGðc; sÞ ¼ jðRðcÞ  GðcÞÞ  ðGðsÞ  RðsÞÞj
ð2Þ
BYðc; sÞ ¼ jðBðcÞ  YðcÞÞ  ðYðsÞ  BðsÞÞj
ð3Þ
2.1.4 Orientation-based saliency map
Local orientation information is gained from I by oriented
Gabor pyramids O(r, h) where r 2[0, 1, …, 8] represents
Input Image
Linear Filter
Orientation
Intensity
Color
Linear combination
Saliency Map
Winner Take All
Attended 
Location
Inhibition of 
Return
Feature 
Maps
Conspicuity 
Map
Across-scale  
combinations & 
normalization
Center-
surround 
Difference & 
Normalization
Fig. 4 Architecture of building
saliency maps based on three
types of image features:
intensity, color, and orientation
84
S. Wang et al.
123


the scale and h 2 f0; 45; 90; 135g stands for the pre-
ferred orientation. Gabor ﬁlters are the product of a cosine
grating and a 2D Gaussian envelope, approximating the
receptive ﬁeld sensitivity proﬁle of orientation-selective
neurons in primary visual cortex. Orientation feature maps
O(s, c, h) encode local orientation contrast between the
centers and surround scales. In total, 42 feature maps are
created: 6 from intensity, 12 from color, and 24 from
orientation.
Oðc; s; hÞ ¼ jOðc; hÞ  Oðs; hÞj
ð4Þ
2.1.5 Combination of saliency maps from different features
The difﬁculty in combining different maps is that they
represent a priori not comparable modalities, with different
dynamic ranges and extraction mechanisms (Kayser et al.
2005). Furthermore, because all 42 maps are combined,
salient objects which are strong in only a few maps may be
masked by noise or by less-salient objects present in a
larger number of maps.
Because of the absence of top–down supervision, a map
normalization operator Nð:Þ is proposed, which globally
promotes maps in which a small number of strong peaks of
activity is present, meanwhile globally suppressing maps
which contain numerous comparable peak responses. Nð:Þ
consists of
(1)
normalizing the values range in the map to a ﬁxed
range [0,…, M], in order to eliminate modality
dependent amplitude differences;
(2)
ﬁnding the location of the map’s global maximum M
and computing the average m of all its other local
maxima;
(3)
globally multiplying the map byðM  mÞ2.
Only local maxima activities are considered, such that
Nð:Þ compares responses associated with meaningful
‘active spots’ in the map and ignores homogeneous areas.
Comparing the maximum activity in the whole map to the
average overall activity measures the difference between
the most active location and the average. If the difference is
large, the most active location stands out, and the map is
strongly promoted. Otherwise, the map contains nothing
unique and is suppressed.
Feature maps are combined into three ‘‘conspicuity
maps’’, I for intensity (5), C for color (6), and O for ori-
entation (7), at the scale r ¼ 4 of the saliency map. They
are gained by across-scale addition  which consists of
reduction of each map to scale four and point-by-point
addition.
I ¼ 
4
c¼2

c¼4
s¼cþ3 NðIðc; sÞÞ
ð5Þ
C ¼ 
4
c¼2 
c¼4
s¼cþ3 NðRGðc; sÞÞ þ NðBYðc; sÞÞ
ð6Þ
For orientation, 4 intermediary maps are created by
combining the six maps for a given h and then are
combined into a single orientation conspicuity map:
O ¼
X
h2f0;45;90;135g

4
c¼2 
c¼4
s¼cþ3 NðIðc; sÞÞ
ð7Þ
The motivation of the creation of three separate
channels (I,C, and O) is based on the hypothesis that
similar features compete strongly for saliency, meanwhile
different modalities contribute separately to the saliency
map. The three conspicuity maps are normalized and
grouped into the ﬁnal input S to the saliency map.
S ¼ 1
3 NðIÞ þ NðCÞ þ NðOÞ


ð8Þ
From above equations, we get the most salient image
locations based on the maximum of the saliency map. We
can simply detect the attended areas as the connected points
by comparing the value of the saliency map and a threshold.
2.2 Bipartite graph matching-based indoor signage
detection
2.2.1 Detecting signage in attended areas
The sliding method window is a popular technique for
identifying and localizing objects in an image (Davignon
et al. 2005). The traditional approach involves scanning the
whole image with a ﬁxed-size rectangular window and
applying a classiﬁer to the sub-image deﬁned by the win-
dow. The classiﬁer extracts image features within the
window and returns the probability that the window bounds
a particular object. The process is repeated on different
scales so that objects can be detected at any size (Noureldin
et al. 2007). Usually non-maximal neighborhood suppres-
sion is applied to the output to remove multiple detections
of the same object. In order to improve the efﬁciency, our
method only scans the attended areas which can signiﬁ-
cantly reduce the processing time of the sliding window
algorithm (Wang et al. 2011).
2.2.2 Bipartite graph matching for queried signage
recognition
To detect indoor signage queried by a blind user, we
employ the ‘‘Bipartite Graph Matching (BGM)’’ algorithm
to compare the query patterns and the slide-windows at the
attended areas. The detailed procedures of the BGM
Detecting signage and doors for blind navigation
85
123


algorithm can be found at papers (Kakimura 2010;
Pranesachar 1999). Suppose A denotes the window and
B denotes the sub-image covered by window A. The BGM
algorithm ﬁrst calculates the edges of the window and the
sub-image, followed by evaluating the degree of the match
as
BGMðA; BÞ ¼ x
N
ð9Þ
where x denotes the sum of the pixels that exist in the edge
images of both A and B, and N denotes the size of the
window. Larger values of function (9) correspond to a
better match; therefore, the BGM algorithm scans the
image and ﬁnds the location with the largest matching
score:
B ¼ arg max BGMðA; BÞ
ð
Þ
ð10Þ
The maximization can be solved by a gradient-based
optimization technique. However, the function (10) is
non-convex
and
multi-modal,
so
the
gradient-based
optimization
technique
is
easy
to
mislead
in
local
extreme. In this paper, an exhaustive searching method is
employed to ﬁnd the global maxima.
2.3 Generalization to multiple signage detection
Our method can handle both single signage and multiple
signage detection. The pseudo-codes of multiple signage
detection are listed below, which are based on multiple
runs of aforementioned single pattern detection described
above. Here, I denotes the original image; Pi denotes the ith
signage pattern; S denotes the saliency map; BGM denotes
the value of bipartite graph matching; and Li denotes the
location found for the ith pattern.
Step1
Initialization. Input I, P1, P2, … PN;
Step2
S = GetSaliencyMap(I);
Step3
for i = 1: N [BGMi, Li] = SinglePatternDetection
(I, S, Pi); end
Step4
i* = argmax fBGMig;
Step5
Output i* and Li*
3 Method for door detection
In order to provide more information for blind users, we
further develop a robust method to detect doors associated
to the detected signage because doors are important land-
marks for wayﬁnding and navigation. Doors provide tran-
sition points between separated spaces as well as entrance
and exit information. Therefore, reliable and efﬁcient door
detection is a key component of an effective indoor way-
ﬁnding aid. There are several existing image-based door
detection algorithms (Chen and Birchﬁeld 2008; Munoz-
Salinas et al. 2004; Murillo et al. 2008). Chen and Birch-
ﬁeld developed a door detector based on the features of
pairs of vertical lines, concavity, gap between the door and
ﬂoor, color, texture, kick plate, and vanishing point (Chen
and Birchﬁeld 2008). Murillo et al. (2008) proposed a door
detection algorithm to handle all the doors with a similar
color. Both above algorithms would fail while the colors of
the doors varied. Munoz-Salinas et al. (2004) developed a
doorframe model-based algorithm which can handle doors
with different colors. However, their algorithm cannot
discriminate doors from other large rectangular objects,
such as bookshelves, cabinets, etc.
As shown in Fig. 5, our algorithm is based on the gen-
eral geometric shape of door frame by combining edges
and corners which can handle doors with a wide variety of
color, texture, occlusions, illumination, scales, and view-
points among different indoor environments. Furthermore,
our algorithm can differentiate doors from other door-like
objects such as bookshelves and cabinets.
3.1 Edge and corner-based geometric door model
As shown in Fig. 6a, the geometric model of a door con-
sists of four corners and four lines. However, in our
application, it is often that only a part of a door is captured
by a wearable camera, especially for visually impaired
users who cannot aim the camera to ‘‘frame’’ the door. To
detect a door from images, we made the following
assumptions which are easy to achieve in practice: (1) at
least two door corners are visible; (2) both the vertical lines
of a door frame are visible; (3) vertical lines of a door
frame are nearly perpendicular to the horizontal axis of an
image; (4) a door has at least a certain width and length.
For the algorithm implementation, we ﬁrst extract edges
and corners as shown in Fig. 6b, c. Edges and corners are
insensitive to variations in color, viewpoints, scales, and
illumination. Then the door-corner candidates are detected
based on the relationship of four corners of the doorframe
in the geometric door model. To determine whether a door-
corner candidate represents a real doorframe, we further
check if there are matching edges of the door frame
between corners of each door-corner candidate. If the
pixels of matching edges are larger than a threshold, then
this door-corner candidate corresponds to a real door in the
image. If there is more than one door-corner candidate with
matching edges of same doorframe, they will be merged as
one detected door.
3.2 Detecting doors from door-like objects
Doors are generally recessed or inset into a wall while
other door-like objects such as bookshelves and cabinets
86
S. Wang et al.
123


normally protrude in relief from a wall. To distinguish inset
doors from protruding bookshelves and cabinets, we utilize
information from faces formed by an inset or protrusion to
obtain the depth information with respect to the wall.
Figure 7 illustrates the different geometric characteris-
tics and different relative positions of lateral faces and the
detected door frame. In Fig. 7a, c, the door or door-like
object is located on the right side with respect to the
Fig. 5 Flow chart of our
proposed door detection method
based on geometric door frame
model
(c)
(b)
(a)
Fig. 6 a Geometric door
model, b detected edge map,
and c extracted corners
(a)
(b) 
(c)
Fig. 7 Inset and protruding models. a Inset object: door frame
located on user’s right side and lateral face located on doorframe’s
left side. b Inset object: frame located on user’s left side and lateral
face located on frame’s right side. c Protruding object: frame located
on user’s right side and lateral face located on frame’s right side.
d Protruding object: frame located on the left side; lateral face located
on the left side
(a)
(f)
(e) 
(c) 
(d)
(b) 
Fig. 8 Elevator button detection: a original image; b query elevator button of ‘‘Open’’ symbol; c query elevator button of ‘‘Close’’ symbol;
d saliency map of the original image; e detected ‘‘Open’’ button; and f detected ‘‘Close’’ button
Detecting signage and doors for blind navigation
87
123


(a)
(f)
(e)
(c)
(d) 
(b)
Fig. 9 Restroom signage detection: a original image, b query pattern of ‘‘Men’s’’ signage, c query pattern of ‘‘Women’s’’ signage, d saliency
map, e detected ‘‘Men’s’’ signage, and f detected ‘Women’s’’ signage
Fig. 10 Multiple signage
detection results. First row:
multiple queried signage
patterns; second row: original
image, saliency map, and the
detected result of pattern 2
(signage of Men’s restroom);
third row: original image,
saliency map, and the detected
result of pattern 1 (signage of
Women’s restroom); fourth
row: original image, saliency
map, and the detected result of
pattern 3 (signage of Disabled
restroom)
88
S. Wang et al.
123


camera if L12 \ L34 of the detected frame. The lateral
(C1 C2 C5 C6) position of the doorframe (C1 C2 C3 C4)
indicates that the object is inset (left side) or protruding
(right side). Similarly as shown in Fig. 7b, d, the bookshelf
and the elevator are located on the left side with respect to
the camera, and the lateral positions are different for the
inset elevator (right side) and protruding bookshelf (right
side). Therefore, combining the position of a frame and the
position of a lateral, we can determine the inset or relief of
a frame-like object. More details can be found in a paper by
Tian et al. (2012).
4 Experimental results and discussions
4.1 Single signage detection
Independent travel is well known to present signiﬁcant
challenges for individuals with severe vision impairment,
thereby reducing quality of life and compromising safety.
Based on our survey with blind users, detection of indoor
signage such as elevator buttons and restrooms has high
priority. Therefore, our experiments focus on the detection
of signage.
Figure 8 displays detection of elevator buttons. The
camera-captured image of six different elevator buttons is
shown in Fig. 8a. Figure 8d is the corresponding saliency
map extracted from the original image using intensity,
color, and orientation. The bright pixels indicate the
attended areas. Figure 8b, c show the query symbols of
‘‘open’’ and ‘‘close’’ buttons which are recorded in the
query database of indoor signage. Figure 8e, f demon-
strates the ﬁnal detection results (the red rectangular
boxes).
Similarly, the detection of restroom signage is displayed
in Fig. 9 as (a) shows the original image including the
signage of both ‘‘Women’s’’ and ‘‘Men’s’’ restrooms;
(b) shows the saliency map of the original image where the
bright regions indicate the attended areas; (c) and (e) are
the query patterns; (d) and (f) are the ﬁnal detection sign-
age results of the ‘‘Men’s’’ and ‘‘Women’s’’ restroom.
4.2 Multiple signage detection
We further extend our algorithm to detect multiple pat-
terns. In this case, the blind user will give multiple query
patterns. As shown in Fig. 10 (ﬁrst row), the query patterns
include both ‘‘Men’s’’ and ‘‘Women’s’’ restroom. We need
to detect the patterns as well as recognize which pattern is
found. The original image, corresponding saliency map,
and the detected signage are shown in the second row for a
‘‘Men’s’’ and in the third row for a ‘‘Women’s’’ restroom.
Fig. 11 Examples of detected directional signage. First row: queried directional signage patterns (‘‘Down’’, ‘‘Right’’, ‘‘Left’’, and ‘‘Up’’); second
row: original images; third row: saliency maps; fourth row: detected results of the directional signage
Detecting signage and doors for blind navigation
89
123


We further evaluate the multi-pattern method to detect
the four emergency exit signage of up, down, left, and right
directions. The detection results of directional signage are
demonstrated in Fig. 11.
4.3 Experimental results
Our proposed method is evaluated by a database of 182
indoor signage images with nine different types of signage
including restrooms (Men’s, Women’s and Disables’),
elevator buttons (Open and Close), and exit directions (left,
right, up, and down). Some examples are shown in Fig. 12
which contains variations in lighting, resolution, and
camera angle.
In single-pattern detection, we use 40 restroom sign
images (20 Women’s, 20 Men’s, and 20 Disables’) and 40
elevator button images (20 close and 20 open). We cor-
rectly detected 18 ‘‘Women’s’’ signs, 16 ‘Men’s’ signs, 18
‘Disables’ signs, 17 ‘‘Close’’ signs, and 17 ‘‘Open’’ signs as
shown in Table 1.
In multi-pattern detection, we use 82 direction signage
(20 up, 20 down, 20 left, and 22 right) and 40 restroom
signage (20 women, 20 men and 20 disable). In this
experiment, 14 ‘‘Women’s’’ signs, 16 ‘Men’s’ signs, 18
‘‘Disables’’ signs, 18 ‘‘Up’’ directions, 16 ‘‘Down’’ direc-
tions, 15 ‘‘left’’ directions, and 19 ‘‘right’’ directions are
correctly detected from the original image. As shown in
Table 2, the multi-pattern detection has a lower successful
rate than that of single-pattern detection.
The wrong signage detections fall into the following two
categories: (1) when we build the saliency map, the query
pattern will be ignored because of low resolution of the
original images and (2) the bipartite graph matching
method is sensitive to the resolution, perspective projec-
tion, and angle of the camera views. It is difﬁcult to dis-
tinguish different types of signage and the success rate of
the detection decreases if the image resolution is too low or
captured with an extreme camera view. As shown in
Fig. 13, the ‘‘close’’ signage is not detected as attended
area in the saliency map due to the low image resolution.
Figure 14 demonstrates that ‘‘Men’’ signage is correctly
detected by the saliency map, but is missed by the bipartite
graph matching method.
4.4 Effectiveness of employing saliency map
To evaluate the effectiveness of a saliency map for the
indoor signage detection, we compare the detection results
with and without using saliency map detection by using the
‘‘Women’s’’ and ‘‘Men’s’’ restroom signage. As shown in
Table 3, only 11‘‘Men’s’’ and 12 ‘‘Women’s’’ restroom
signs are correctly detected by applying bipartite graph
matching on the image without performing saliency map-
based attended area detection. However, with saliency
maps, we correctly detected 14 ‘‘Men’s’’ and 16 ‘‘Women’’
restroom signs. The accuracy is increased from 57.5 %
(without using saliency maps) to 75 % (with saliency
maps). Saliency map can effectively eliminate disturbing
information which would decrease the accuracy of the
bipartite graph matching method.
Normal
Low resolution
Large angle of camera 
Men’s 
bathroom 
Women’s 
bathroom 
Disables’ 
bathroom 
Elevator 
Buttons 
Up 
Down 
Left 
Right 
Fig. 12 Example images of our indoor signage dataset
Table 1 Accuracy of single pattern detection for bathroom signs
Signage
classes
No. of
samples
Correctly
detected
Detection
accuracy (%)
Men’s
20
16
80
Women’s
20
18
90
Disables’
20
18
90
Close
20
17
85
Open
20
17
85
Total
100
86
86
The numbers in bold indicate the total numbers and the average
accuracies of all categories
90
S. Wang et al.
123


4.5 Results of door detection
We evaluated the proposed algorithm on a database we col-
lected which contains 221 images collected from a wide variety
of environments. The database includes 209 door images and
12 non-door images. Door images include doors and elevators
with different colors and textures, and doors captured from
different viewpoints, illumination conditions, and occlusions,
as well as open and glass doors. Non-door images include door-
like objects, such as bookshelves and cabinets. We categorized
thedatabaseintothreegroups:Simple(57images,seeexamples
of the ﬁrst row in Fig. 15), Medium (113 images, see examples
of the second row in Fig. 15), and Complex (51 images, see
examples of the third row in Fig. 15), based on the complexity
ofbackgrounds,intensityofdeformation,andocclusion,aswell
as changes of illumination and scale. As shown in Table 4, the
proposed algorithm achieves an average detection rate of
89.5 % with a false positive rate of 2.3 %. Some examples of
door detection are illustrated in Fig. 15.
Table 2 Accuracy of detect
and recognize multiple patterns
The numbers in bold indicate
the total numbers and the
average accuracies of all
categories
Signage
classes
No. of
samples
Correct
recognized
Wrong
recognized
Missed
Recognition
accuracy (%)
Women’s
20
14
2
4
70
Men’s
20
16
1
3
80
Disables’
20
18
2
0
90
Up
20
18
0
2
90
Down
20
16
2
2
80
Right
22
19
1
2
86.3
Left
20
15
2
3
75
Total
142
116
10
16
81.6
Fig. 13 ‘‘Open’’ button of
elevator: a original image,
b saliency map
Fig. 14 ‘‘Men’’ restroom:
a original image, b saliency
map, c detection result
Table 3 Effectiveness of saliency map for indoor signage detection
Classes
No. of
Samples
Correct detected
by BGM
Correct detected by
SM and BGM
Men
20
11
14
Women
20
12
16
Total
40
23
30
Accuracy
57.5 %
75 %
The numbers in bold indicate the total numbers and the average
accuracies of all categories
Detecting signage and doors for blind navigation
91
123


5 Conclusions
In this paper, we have proposed a framework for signage
recognition and door detection to assist blind people
accessing unfamiliar indoor environments. The signage
recognition approach employs both saliency maps and
bipartite graph matching to recognize the signage patterns
queried by blind users. The door detection method is
based on a general geometric door frame model which is
robust to handle doors with different appearances. The
effectiveness and efﬁciency of the proposed methods have
been evaluated by the databases of indoor signage and
doors.
Our future work will focus on extending our method to
handle signage and objects with larger variations of per-
spective projection, scale, point view, occlusions, etc. We
will also address the signiﬁcant human interface issues
associated with wayﬁnding for blind users.
Acknowledgments
This
work
was
supported
by
NSF
grant
IIS-0957016, EFRI-1137172, NIH 1R21EY020990, ARO grant
W911NF-09-1-0565, FHWA grant DTFH61-12-H-00002, Microsoft
Research, and CITY SEEDs grant.
References
Baker A (2010) Blind man is found dead in elevator shaft. The New
York Times, City Room, May
Biederman I (1987) 1987, Recognition-by-components: a theory of
human image understanding. Psychological Rev 94:115–147
Chen Z, Birchﬁeld S (2008) Visual detection of lintel-occluded doors
from a single image. IEEE computer society workshop on visual
localization for mobile platforms
Davies C, Tompkinson W, Donnelly N, Gordon L, Cave K (2006)
Visual saliency as an aid to updating digital maps. Comput Hum
Behav 22(4):672–684
Davignon F, Deprez JF, Basset O (2005) A parametric imaging
approach for the segmentation of ultrasound data. Ultrasonics
43(10):789–801
Everingham M, Thomas B, Troscianko T (2003) Wearable mobility
aid for low vision using scene classiﬁcation in a markov random
ﬁeld model framework. Int J Hum Comput Interact 15(2)
Hasanuzzaman F, Yang X, Tian Y (2011) Robust and effective
component-based banknote recognition for the blind, Accepted,
IEEE transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics—Part C:
applications and reviews
Hung C, Kreiman G, Poggio T, DiCarlo J (2005) Fast read-out of object
identity from macaque inferior temporal cortex. Science 310:863–866
Ivanchenko V, Coughlan J, Shen H (2008) Crosswatch: a camera
phone system for orienting visually impaired pedestrians at
trafﬁc intersections. 11th International conference on computers
helping people with special needs (ICCHP ‘08)
Fig. 15 Examples of successfully detected doors in different environments. First row: simple; second row: medium; third row: complex
Table 4 Door detection results
Data category
True positive
rate (%)
False positive
rate (%)
Simple
98.2
0
Medium
90.5
3.5
Complex
80.0
2.0
Total
89.5
2.3
The numbers in bold indicate the total numbers and the average
accuracies of all categories
92
S. Wang et al.
123


Ivanchenko V, Coughlan J, and Shen H (2008) Detecting and locating
crosswalks using a camera phone. Fourth IEEE workshop on
embedded computer vision, in conjunction with computer vision
and pattern recognition (CVPR ‘08)
Kakimura N (2010) Matching structure of symmetric bipartite graphs
and a generalization of Po´lya’s problem. J Combinatorial Theory
Ser B 100(6):650–670
Kayser C, Petkov CI, Lippert M, Logothetis NK (2005) Mechanisms
for allocating auditory attention: an auditory saliency map. Curr
biol 8 15(21):1943–1947
Kocur I, Parajasegaram R, Pokharel G (2004) Global data on visual
impairment in the year 2002. Bull World Health Organ
82:844–851
Kreiman G (2008) Biological object recognition, Scholarpedia. 3(6):2667.
http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Biological_object_recognition
Leyk S, Boesch R, Weibel R (2006) Saliency and semantic
processing: extracting forest cover from historical topographic
maps. Pattern Recogn 39(5):953–968
Makino K, Takabatake T, Fujishige S (2002) A simple matching
algorithm for regular bipartite graphs. Inf Process Lett 84(4):
189–193
Manduchi R, Coughlan J, Ivanchenko V (2008) Search strategies of
visually impaired persons using a camera phone wayﬁnding
system. 11th International conference on computers helping
people with special needs (ICCHP ‘08)
Munoz-Salinas R, Aguirre E, Garcia-Silvente M, Gonzalez A (2004)
Door-detection using computer vision and fuzzy logic. In:
Proceedings of the 6th WSEAS international conference on
mathematical methods and computational techniques in electri-
cal engineering
Murillo A, Kosecka J, Guerrero J (2008) c. Visual door detection
integrating appearance and shape cues. Robotics and autono-
mous systems, Sagues
Neves A, Pinho A, Martins D, Cunha B (2011) An efﬁcient
omnidirectional vision system for soccer robots: from calibration
to object detection. Mechatronics 21(2):399–410
Noureldin A, El-Shaﬁe A, Taha MR (2007) Optimizing neuro-fuzzy
modulesfordatafusionofvehicularnavigationsystemsusingtemporal
cross-validation. Eng Appl Artiﬁcial Intelligence 20(1):49–61
Park SJ, An KH, Lee M (2002) Saliency map model with adaptive
masking based on independent component analysis. Neurocom-
puting 49(1–4):417–422
Potter M, Levy E (1969) Recognition memory for a rapid sequence of
pictures. J Exp Psychol 81:10–15
Pradeep V, Medioni G, Weiland J (2008) Piecewise planar modeling
for step detection using stereo vision, workshop on computer
vision applications for the visually impaired
Pranesachar CR (1999) A class of matching-equivalent’ bipartite
graphs. Discrete Math 203(1–3):207–213
Riesen K, Bunke H (2009) Approximate graph edit distance
computation by means of bipartite graph matching. Image Vis
Comput 27(7):950–959
Schneiderman H, Kanade T (2000) A statistical approach to 3d object
detection applied to faces and cars. In IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition (CVPR’00)
Shen H, Coughlan J (2007) Grouping using factor graphs: an
approach for ﬁnding text with a camera phone. Workshop on
graph-based representations in pattern recognition
Shi H, Yang Y (2007) A computational model of visual attention
based on saliency maps. Appl Math Comput 188(2):1671–1677
Shokoufandeh A, Marsic I, Dickinson SJ (1999) View-based object
recognition using saliency maps. Image Vision Comput 17(5–6):
445–460
Shoval S, Ulrich I, Borenstein J. Computerized obstacle avoidance
systems for the blind and visually impaired. Invited chapter in
intelligent systems and technologies in rehabilitation engineer-
ing. Editors: Teodorescu H.N.L., Jain L.C., CRC Press, ISBN/
ISSN: 0849301408, Publication Date: 12/26/00, 414–448
Thorpe S, Fize D, Marlot C (1996) Speed of processing in the human
visual system. Nature 381:520–522
Tian Y, Yang X, Yi C, Arditi A (2012) Toward a computer vision-
based Wayﬁnding aid for blind persons to access unfamiliar
indoor environments machine vision and applications
Tsao W, Lee A, Liu Y, Chang T-W, Lin H–H (2010) A data mining
approach to face detection. Pattern Recogn 43(3):1039–1049
Viola P, Jones M (2001) Rapid object detection using a boosted
cascade of simple features. In IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition (CVPR’01)
Wang S, Tian Y (2011) Indoor signage detection based on saliency
map and bipartite graph matching, International workshop on
biomedical and health informatics (BHI)
Wang Y, Lin W, Horng S (2011) A sliding window technique for
efﬁcient license plate localization based on discrete wavelet
transform. Expert Syst Appl 38(4):3142–3146
Wang S, Yi C, Tian Y (2012) Signage detection and recognition for
blind persons to access unfamiliar environments. J Comput Vis
Image Process 2(2)
Weber M, Welling M, Perona P (2000) Unsupervised learning of
models for recognition. Proc Eur Conf Comput Vision 2:
101–108
Seeing with sound—the voice, http://www.seeingwithsound.com/
The Smith-Kettlewell rehabilitation engineering research center
(RERC) develops new technology and methods for understand-
ing, assessment and rehabilitation of blindness and visual
impairment. http://www.ski.org/Rehab/
Yang X, Tian Y, Yi C, Arditi A (2010) Context-based indoor object
detection as an aid to blind persons accessing unfamiliar
environments, International conference on ACM multimedia
Yang X, Yuan S, Tian Y (2011) Recognizing clothes patterns for
blind people by conﬁdence margin based feature combination,
International conference on ACM multimedia
Yi C and Tian Y (2011) Assistive Text Reading from Complex
Background for Blind Persons, The 4th International Work-
shop on Camera-Based Document Analysis and Recognition
(CBDAR)
Yi C, Tian Y (2012) Assistive text reading from complex background
for blind persons, In book Camera-Based Document Analysis
and
Recognition,
the
4th
International
Workshop
on
(CBDAR’11), Revised Selected Papers, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science series, Vol. 7139, by Springer, Iwamura M,
Shafait F (eds), ISSN 0302-9743
Yuan S, Tian Y, Arditi A (2011) Clothing matching for visually
impaired persons, technology and disability, 23
Zandifar A, Duraiswami R, Chahine A, Davis L (2002) A video based
interface to textual information for the visually impaired. In:
Proceeding of IEEE 4th international conference on multimodal
interfaces
Zhang YD, Wu LN (2008) Pattern recognition via PCNN and Tsallis
entropy. Sensors 8(11):7518–7529
Detecting signage and doors for blind navigation
93
123


