ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 18 December 2018
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00509
Edited by:
Muthuraman Muthuraman,
University Medical Center of the
Johannes Gutenberg University
Mainz, Germany
Reviewed by:
Edmund Wascher,
Leibniz-Institut für Arbeitsforschung
an der TU Dortmund (IfADo),
Germany
Bahamn Nasseroleslami,
Trinity College Dublin, Ireland
*Correspondence:
Gianluca Di Flumeri
gianluca.diﬂumeri@uniroma1.it;
gluca.diﬂumeri@gmail.com
Received: 16 July 2018
Accepted: 05 December 2018
Published: 18 December 2018
Citation:
Di Flumeri G, Borghini G, Aricò P,
Sciaraffa N, Lanzi P, Pozzi S, Vignali V,
Lantieri C, Bichicchi A, Simone A and
Babiloni F (2018) EEG-Based Mental
Workload Neurometric to Evaluate
the Impact of Different Trafﬁc
and Road Conditions in Real Driving
Settings.
Front. Hum. Neurosci. 12:509.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00509
EEG-Based Mental Workload
Neurometric to Evaluate the Impact
of Different Trafﬁc and Road
Conditions in Real Driving Settings
Gianluca Di Flumeri1,2,3*, Gianluca Borghini1,2,3, Pietro Aricò1,2,3, Nicolina Sciaraffa1,2,4,
Paola Lanzi5, Simone Pozzi5, Valeria Vignali6, Claudio Lantieri6, Arianna Bichicchi6,
Andrea Simone6 and Fabio Babiloni1,3,7
1 BrainSigns srl, Rome, Italy, 2 IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Neuroelectrical Imaging and BCI Lab, Rome, Italy,
3 Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 4 Department of Anatomical, Histological,
Forensic and Orthopedic Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 5 Deep Blue srl, Rome, Italy, 6 Department
of Civil, Chemical, Environmental and Materials Engineering (DICAM), School of Engineering and Architecture, University
of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 7 Department of Computer Science, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
Car driving is considered a very complex activity, consisting of different concomitant
tasks and subtasks, thus it is crucial to understand the impact of different factors,
such as road complexity, trafﬁc, dashboard devices, and external events on the driver’s
behavior and performance. For this reason, in particular situations the cognitive demand
experienced by the driver could be very high, inducing an excessive experienced
mental workload and consequently an increasing of error commission probability. In
this regard, it has been demonstrated that human error is the main cause of the
57% of road accidents and a contributing factor in most of them. In this study, 20
young subjects have been involved in a real driving experiment, performed under
different trafﬁc conditions (rush hour and not) and along different road types (main
and secondary streets). Moreover, during the driving tasks different speciﬁc events,
in particular a pedestrian crossing the road and a car entering the trafﬁc ﬂow just
ahead of the experimental subject, have been acted. A Workload Index based on the
Electroencephalographic (EEG), i.e., brain activity, of the drivers has been employed to
investigate the impact of the different factors on the driver’s workload. Eye-Tracking
(ET) technology and subjective measures have also been employed in order to have
a comprehensive overview of the driver’s perceived workload and to investigate the
different insights obtainable from the employed methodologies. The employment of
such EEG-based Workload index conﬁrmed the signiﬁcant impact of both trafﬁc and
road types on the drivers’ behavior (increasing their workload), with the advantage of
being under real settings. Also, it allowed to highlight the increased workload related to
external events while driving, in particular with a signiﬁcant effect during those situations
when the trafﬁc was low. Finally, the comparison between methodologies revealed the
higher sensitivity of neurophysiological measures with respect to ET and subjective ones.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
1
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
In conclusion, such an EEG-based Workload index would allow to assess objectively the
mental workload experienced by the driver, standing out as a powerful tool for research
aimed to investigate drivers’ behavior and providing additional and complementary
insights with respect to traditional methodologies employed within road safety research.
Keywords:
electroencephalography,
mental
workload,
human
factor,
machine-learning,
asSWLDA,
neuroergonomics, car driving, road safety
INTRODUCTION
According to the reports of World Health Organization (WHO)
(World Health Organization, 2015), every year traﬃc accidents
cause the death of 1.3 million people around the world, and
moreover about 50 million people suﬀer from a disability caused
by accidents related to cars. By 2020, it is estimated that traﬃc
accidents will be the ﬁfth leading cause of death in the world,
reaching 2.4 million deaths per year (World Health Organization,
2013). Among the principal causes of the car accidents and
related mortality there is the human factor (Hansen, 2007;
Subramanian, 2012). In particular, it has been demonstrated
that human error is the main cause of the 57% of road
accidents and a contributing factor in over 90% of them (Treat
et al., 1979). Driver’s common errors are largely correlated to
overload, distractions, tiredness, or the simultaneous realization
of other activities during driving (Allnutt, 1987; Horowitz
and Dingus, 1992; Summala and Mikkola, 1994; Petridou and
Moustaki, 2000). In fact, the human performance decrease, and
consequently the errors commission, are directly attributable to
aberrant mental states, in particular the mental workload while
degrading in overload, which is considered one of the most
important human factor constructs in inﬂuencing performance
(Reason, 2000; Parasuraman et al., 2008; Paxion et al., 2014). The
model theorized by De Waard (1996), widely used in automotive
psychological research, establishes the relation between task
demands and performance depending on the driver workload.
This model describes the driving activity with a hierarchy of tasks
on three levels, the strategical, the tactical and the operational,
each of them divided into diﬀerent subtasks, describing the
driving as a very complex and often high-demanding activity.
Therefore, the cognitive resources required in very complex
situations can exceed the available resources, leading to an
increase of workload and to performance impairments (Robert,
1997; Paxion et al., 2014).
The aforesaid statistics and ﬁndings justify the increasing
attention received by the Human Factor within the road safety
research during the last decades. As well as in other human-
centered domains such as aviation and industry (Vicente, 2013;
Toppi et al., 2016; Vecchiato et al., 2016; Borghini et al., 2017a),
psychological disciplines have been taken on a considerable
scientiﬁc importance receiving more and more attention. They
have become a fundamental instrument for understanding and
interpreting the behavior of the driver (Bucchi et al., 2012),
trying to provide cognitive models in order to predict and
avoid unsafe actions as well as to understand the relationship
between such unsafe behaviors and diﬀerent factors related to
traﬃc, road complexity, car equipment and external events. The
most frequently adopted techniques in this research ﬁeld are
those based on questionnaires and interviews after large-scale
experiments in naturalistic (i.e., real driving) and simulated (i.e.,
by using simulator) settings. They make it possible to acquire
useful information for personality tests and proﬁles, they help
to highlight and correct behavioral diﬃculties and, therefore,
they shape the driver to have a safe relationship with driving in
diﬀerent conditions, and in particular in emergency situations, as
well as to improve road and car design and adapt safety education
with respect to the driver background (Cestac et al., 2014; Kaplan
et al., 2015).
In order to increase the strength of such psychological
research applied to road safety, this discipline could now
beneﬁt from recent advancements and outcomes coming
from Neuroscience and Neuroergonomics. The ﬁeld of the
Neuroergonomics aims to study the relationship between the
human behavior and the brain at work (Parasuraman and Rizzo,
2008). It provides a multidisciplinary translational approach that
merges elements of neuroscience, cognitive psychology, human
factors and ergonomics to study brain structure and function in
everyday environments. Applied to the driving safety domain,
a Neuroergonomic approach should allow to investigate the
relationship between human mental behavior, performance and
road safety, taking advantage from neurophysiological measures
and providing a deeper understanding of human cognition
and its role in decision making and possible error commission
at the wheel (Lees et al., 2010). In fact, it is widely accepted
in scientiﬁc literature the limit of using subjective measures
alone, such as questionnaires and interview, because of their
intrinsic subjective nature and the impossibility to catch the
“unconscious” phenomena behind human behaviors (Gopher
and Braune, 1984; Dienes, 2004; Wall et al., 2004; Aricò et al.,
2017b). In this context, technological advancements enable the
use of neurophysiological measures, for example the measure of
brain activity, heart activity, eye movements, to obtain objective
measures of speciﬁc mental states with low invasiveness
(Aricò
et
al.,
2017c).
Among
the
several
neuroimaging
techniques,
such
as
functional
Magnetic
Resonance
and
Magnetoencephalography, Electroencephalographic technique
(EEG) has been demonstrated to be one of the best techniques
to infer, even in real time, objective assessment of mental states
and in particular the mental workload experienced by the user,
since other than being a direct measure of brain activations, it
is characterized by high temporal resolution, limited cost and
invasiveness (Prinzel et al., 2000; Aricò et al., 2016b). EEG-based
measures of drivers’ mental states have been already investigated
during the recent decades in order to determine brain cues of
incoming risky psychophysical states, e.g., fatigue, drowsiness,
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
2
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
inattention, overload (Lin et al., 2005; Michail et al., 2008;
Brookhuis and de Waard, 2010; Borghini et al., 2012, 2014;
Maglione et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2015; Kong
et al., 2015, 2017), and to develop futuristic Human-Machine
interaction solutions and automation (Kohlmorgen et al.,
2007; Lin et al., 2009; Göhring et al., 2013; Aricò et al., 2015).
Nevertheless, two important gaps are still present in this domain:
(1) the majority of neurophysiological studies about drivers’
behaviors have been conducted in simulated environments
or in poor realistic settings, but it has been proven that
same experimental tasks are perceived diﬀerently, in terms
of mental workload, if performed in a simulator or in real
environment (de Winter et al., 2014); also, not only the task
perception but the driver behavior itself related to a speciﬁc
condition could change if the same condition is reproduced
in simulators or in a real scenario (Philip et al., 2005);
(2) in scientiﬁc literature there is still the lack of a synthetic
EEG-based workload index to adopt in a systematic way
within the road safety research, in order to integrate results
coming from traditional techniques, such as subjective
measures and car parameters analysis, with additional
insights arising directly from drivers’ brain (Paxion
et al., 2014). Several studies about EEG correlates of
driver’s mental workload have been carried on, however
experimental examples in real settings of a multimodal
approach integrating neurophysiological with traditional
measures are still lacking (Xing et al., 2018).
In this study, it has been investigated the possibility to adopt
the approach recently developed and patented by the authors
of this work (Aricò et al., 2016b, 2017a), to evaluate the mental
workload experienced by car drivers by means of their EEG
activity. More speciﬁcally, such an approach is based on a
machine-learning method able to assess, even online and in high-
realistic environments, the user’s mental workload through a
synthetic index. The authors successfully employed and validated
such approach in diﬀerent aviation-related applications, such as
adaptive automation (Aricò et al., 2016a), personnel training
(Borghini et al., 2017c), personnel expertise evaluation (Borghini
et al., 2017b), moreover highlighting the higher sensitivity of such
measures compared with subjective ones (Di Flumeri et al., 2015;
Aricò et al., 2016b). Furthermore, the feasibility of obtaining
EEG-based measures of driver’s workload has already been
validated through a pilot study of the present work conducted
with eight subjects while performing a simpliﬁed version of the
real driving task employed within the present work (Di Flumeri
et al., 2018).
For the present work, 20 young subjects have been involved in
a real driving task along urban roads, performed under diﬀerent
traﬃc conditions (rush hour and not) and going through diﬀerent
road types (main and secondary streets). Also, during the driving
tasks speciﬁc events, in particular a pedestrian crossing the road
and a car entering the traﬃc ﬂow just ahead of the experimental
subject, have been acted. During the experiments the drivers’
brain activity, through EEG technique, and eye movements,
through Eye-Tracking (ET) devices, have been collected. In
addition, subjective measures, car parameters (e.g., position,
speed, etc.) and videos around the car have been gathered. Thanks
to this multimodal approach, the present study aimed at:
• Validating the machine-learning approach developed by the
authors also in automotive domain, through an experiment
in high-realistic settings, i.e., real driving;
• Employing the EEG-based Workload index obtained from
the hence validated approach to evaluate the impact of
diﬀerent factors, speciﬁcally the road complexity, the traﬃc
intensity (depending on the hour of the day), and two
speciﬁc events (a pedestrian crossing the road and a
car entering in the traﬃc ﬂow), on the drivers’ mental
workload;
• Comparing the neurophysiological measures with eye
movements and subjective ones, in order to provide
evidence of the complementarity of the obtained insights.
In conclusion, the present work will explore the potential
of integrating these new methodologies, i.e., neurophysiological
measures, with traditional approaches in order to enhance and
extent research on drivers’ behaviors and road safety.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The Experimental Protocol
Twenty male students (24.9 ± 1.8 years old, licensed from
5.9 ± 1 years, with a mean annual mileage of 10350 km/year)
from the University of Bologna (Italy) have been recruited and
involved on a voluntary basis in this study. They were selected
in order to have a homogeneous experimental group in terms of
age, sex, and driving expertise. The experiment was conducted
following the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki of
1975, as revised in 2000. Informed consent and authorization to
use the video graphical material were obtained from each subject
on paper, after the explanation of the study.
Two equal cars have been used for the experiments, i.e., Fiat
500L 1.3 Mjt, with diesel engine and manual transmission. The
subjects had to drive the car along a route going through urban
roads at the periphery of Bologna (Italy). In particular, the route
consisted in three laps of a “circuit” about 2500 m long to be
covered with the daylight (Figure 1).
The circuit was designed with the aim to include two segments
of interest, both about 1000 m long but diﬀerent in term of road
complexity and so supposed diﬀerent also in terms of cognitive
demand, thus named hereafter “Easy” and “Hard”: (i) Easy was
a secondary road, mainly straight, with an intersection halfway
with the right-of-way, one lane and low traﬃc capacity, serving a
residential area; (ii) Hard was a main road, mainly straight, with
two roundabouts halfway, three lanes and high traﬃc capacity,
serving a commercial area. This factor will be hereafter named
“ROAD.” This assumption has been made on the basis of several
evidences coming from scientiﬁc literature about road safety and
behavior (Harms, 1991; Verwey, 2000; Paxion et al., 2014).
Furthermore, each subject had to repeat the task two times
within the same day, one time during rush and one during normal
hour: this factor will be hereafter named “HOUR,” while the
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
3
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
FIGURE 1 | The experimental circuit about 2500 m long along Bologna roads. The blue line indicates the circuit segment labeled as “Hard” in terms of road
complexity, while the yellow one the “Easy” segment. The cyan squares and the red asterisks represent the points were the events, respectively the pedestrian and
the car, have been acted along the 3rd lap of both the task repetitions.
TABLE 1 | Data extracted from the General Plan of Urban Trafﬁc of Bologna (Italy)
referred to the trafﬁc ﬂow intensities in the experimental area during the day.
Transits
Total
RUSH hour
NORMAL
14 h (6 ÷ 20)
Morning
Afternoon
12 h
(12:30–13:30)
(16:30–17:30)
Total
19385
2024
2066
15295
Frequency
(Transits/hour)
–
2024
2066
1274,6
These data have been used to design two experimental conditions different in terms
of trafﬁc: the RUSH hours are characterized by trafﬁc higher than during NORMAL
hours.
two conditions “Rush” and “Normal.” The rush hours of that
speciﬁc area have been determined according to the General
Plan of Urban Traﬃc of Bologna (PGTU, please see Table 1):
the two “Rush hour” time-windows were from 12:30 to 13:30
(lunchtime) and from 16:30 to 17:30 (work closing time), with
the experiments performed from 9.30 to 17.30, in order to ensure
a homogeneous daylight condition.
Finally, during the last lap (i.e., the 3rd one) of each task
repetition (i.e., Rush and Normal hour) two diﬀerent events
have been simulated, by involving actors, twice (i.e., along the
Hard and the Easy circuit segment) along the route: a pedestrian
crossing the road, and a car entering the traﬃc ﬂow just
ahead of the experimental subject, hereafter labeled respectively
“Pedestrian” and “Car.” The event types have been selected as
the most probable events coherently with the urban context, as
well as the safest to act, i.e., without introducing any risk for
the actors, for the experimental subjects and for the traﬃc in
general.
The Figure 1 shows the experimental circuit along Bologna
roads, highlighting the “ROAD complexity” distribution as well
as the occurred events.
To summarize, each subject, after a proper experimental
brieﬁng, performed a driving task of three laps along a circuit
through urban roads two times, during Rush and Normal hours.
The order of Rush and Normal conditions has been randomized
among the subjects, in order to avoid any order eﬀect (Kirk,
2015). Each lap consisted in a Hard and an Easy segment, where
hard and easy are referred to the road complexity and thus task
diﬃculty. Also, despite the initial brieﬁng, the ﬁrst lap of both
the tasks has been considered an “adaptation lap,” while the data
recorded during the second and third laps have been taken into
account for the analysis. Finally, during the third lap two equal
events have been simulated both along the Easy and the Hard
segment (i.e., four events in total for each subject for each task,
Rush and Normal).
The Figure 2 shows a graphical representation of the
experimental protocol.
During the whole protocol physiological data, in terms of
brain activity through Electroencephalographic (EEG) technique
and eye gazes through ET devices, and data about driving
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
4
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
FIGURE 2 | Overview of the experimental protocol, consisting of two main driving tasks different in terms of trafﬁc (normal and rush hour) and performed in a
randomized order. Each task consisted of three laps along the circuit in Figure 1: the ﬁrst lap aimed to allow the driver to take conﬁdence with the circuit, while the
second and third lap have been used for analysis. In particular, during the third lap four events have been acted as indicated in Figure 1. Before the experiment the
participant received a brieﬁng and was equipped by EEG and Eye Tracking devices, while his car with Video VBOX system. At the end of each task the participant
had to ﬁll a questionnaire (NASA-TLX) about the experienced mental workload.
behavior, through a professional device mounted on the car (i.e., a
VBOX Pro), have been recorded. In addition, subjective measures
of perceived Mental Workload have been collected from the
subjects after both the tasks through the NASA Task Load Index
(NASA-TLX) questionnaire (Hart and Staveland, 1988). It was
possible to use Eye Tracker just with half of the subjects’ sample
(i.e., 10 subjects) because of device availability, so eye tracker–
related data have been analyzed for 10 subjects. The following
paragraphs will describe in detail the collection and processing
of the aforementioned data, while the Figure 3 shows the subject
preparation and the recording setup within the car.
The Data Collection
Electroencephalographic Signal Recording and
Processing
The EEG signals have been recorded using the digital monitoring
BEmicro system (EBNeuro, Italy). Twelve EEG channels (FPz,
AF3, AF4, F3, Fz, F4, P3, P7, Pz, P4, P8, and POz), placed
according to the 10–20 International System, were collected with
a sampling frequency of 256 Hz, all referenced to both the
earlobes, grounded to the Cz site, and with the impedances kept
below 20 k. During the experiments the EEG data have been
recorded without any signal conditioning, the whole processing
chain has been applied oﬄine. In particular, EEG signal has been
ﬁrstly band-pass ﬁltered with a fourth-order Butterworth ﬁlter
(high-pass ﬁlter cut-oﬀfrequency: 1 Hz, low-pass ﬁlter cut-oﬀ
frequency: 30 Hz). The Fpz channel has been used to remove
eyes-blink contributions from each channel of the EEG signal
by using the REBLINCA algorithm (Di Flumeri et al., 2016).
This step is necessary because the eyes-blink contribution could
aﬀect the frequency bands correlated to the mental workload, in
particular the theta EEG band. This method allows to correct EEG
signal without losing data.
For other sources of artifacts (i.e., environmental noise,
drivers’ movements, etc.), speciﬁc procedures of the EEGLAB
toolbox (Delorme and Makeig, 2004) have been employed.
Firstly, the EEG signal is segmented into epochs of 2 s (Epoch
length), through moving windows shifted of 0.125 s (Shift), thus
with an overlap of 0.875 s between two contiguous epochs. This
windowing has been chosen with the compromise to have both
a high number of observations, in comparison with the number
FIGURE 3 | On the left (A), the participant preparation phase. In particular, the EEG signal has been acquired through the EEG ampliﬁer in holter modality: the EEG
signal and the electrodes impedances were checked on a computer before starting the experiments. On the right (B), a picture representing the experimental setup
within the car: in particular, other than the EEG cap, also the Eye Tracking device and its recording laptop are shown. The subject in picture, as all the participants,
gave their signed authorization to use the video graphical material for dissemination purposes.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
5
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
of variables, and to respect the condition of stationarity of the
EEG signal (Elul, 1969). In fact, this is a necessary assumption
in order to proceed with the spectral analysis of the signal.
The EEG epochs with the signal amplitude exceeding ±100 µV
(Threshold criterion) are marked as “artifact.” Then, each EEG
epoch has been interpolated in order to check the slope of
the trend within the considered epoch (Trend estimation). If
such a slope is higher than 10 µV/s, the considered epoch
is marked as “artifact.” Finally, the signal sample-to-sample
diﬀerence (Sample-to-sample criterion) has been analyzed: if such
a diﬀerence, in terms of absolute amplitude, is higher than 25 µV,
i.e., an abrupt variation (no-physiological) happened, the EEG
epoch is marked as “artifact.” At the end, the EEG epochs marked
as “artifact” have been removed from the EEG dataset with the
aim to have a clean EEG signal to perform the analyses.
From the clean EEG dataset, the Power Spectral Density (PSD)
has been calculated for each EEG channel for each epoch using
a Hanning window of the same length of the considered epoch
(2 s length, that means 0.5 Hz of frequency resolution). Then,
the EEG frequency bands of interest has been deﬁned for each
subject by the estimation of the Individual Alpha Frequency (IAF)
value (Klimesch, 1999). In order to have a precise estimation
of the alpha peak and, hence of the IAF, the subjects were
been asked to keep the eyes closed for a minute before starting
the experimental tasks. Finally, a spectral features matrix (EEG
channels × Frequency bins) has been obtained in the frequency
bands directly correlated to the mental workload. In particular,
only the theta band [IAF – 6 ÷ IAF – 2], over the EEG frontal
channels, and the alpha band [IAF – 2 ÷ IAF + 2], over the EEG
parietal channels, were considered as variables for the mental
workload evaluation (Gevins and Smith, 2003; Aricò et al., 2016b;
Borghini et al., 2017a).
At
this
point
the
automatic-stop-StepWise
Linear
Discriminant Analysis (asSWLDA), a speciﬁc Machine-Learning
algorithm (basically an upgrade version of the well-known
StepWise Linear Discriminant Analysis) previously developed
(Aricò et al., 2016b), patented (Aricò et al., 2017a) and applied
in diﬀerent applications (Aricò et al., 2016a; Borghini et al.,
2017b,c) by the authors has been employed. On the basis of
the calibration dataset, the asSWLDA is able to ﬁnd the most
relevant spectral features to discriminate the Mental Workload
of the subjects during the diﬀerent experimental conditions
(i.e., EASY = 0 and HARD = 1). Once identiﬁed such spectral
features, the asSWLDA assigns to each feature speciﬁc weights
(wi train), plus a bias (btrain), such that an eventual discriminant
function computed on the training dataset [ytrain(t)] would take
the value 1 in the hardest condition and 0 in the easiest one.
This step represents the calibration, or “Training phase” of the
classiﬁer. Later on, the weights and the bias determined during
the training phase are used to calculate the Linear Discriminant
function [ytest(t)] over the testing dataset (Testing phase), that
should be comprised between 0 (if the condition is Easy) and
1 (if the condition is Hard). Finally, a moving average of 8 s
(8MA) is applied to the ytest(t) function in order to smooth it
out by reducing the variance of the measure: its output is deﬁned
as the EEG-based Workload index (WLSCORE). For the present
work, the training data consisted in the Easy segment of the
2nd lap during the Normal condition and the Hard segment
of the 2nd lap during the Rush condition (they have been
hypothesized the two conditions characterized by respectively
the lowest and highest mental workload demand), while the
testing data consisted of the data of the 3rd lap of both the
conditions.
Here below the training asSWLDA discriminant function
(Equation 1, where fi train(t) represents the PSD matrix of the
training dataset for the data window of the time sample t, and
of the ith feature), the testing one (Equation 2, where fi test(t) is
as fi train(t) but related to the testing dataset) and the equation of
the EEG-based workload index computed with a time-resolution
of 8 s (WLSCORE, Equation 3), are reported.
ytrain(t) =
X
i wi train · fi train(t) + btrain
(1)
ytest(t) =
X
i wi train · fi test(t) + btrain
(2)
WLSCORE = 8MA(ytest(t))
(3)
Eye-Tracking Data and Its Processing
Eye movements of the participants have been recorded through
an ASL Mobile Eye-XG device (EST GmbH, Germany), a system
based on lightweight eyeglasses equipped with two digital high-
resolution cameras. One camera recorded the scene image and
the other the participant’s eye, that is monitored through infrared
rays. The data were recorded with a sampling rate of 30 Hz
(i.e., 33 ms time resolution), and a spatial resolution of 0.5
÷ 1◦. ASL software was used to analyze the data, obtaining
information about the drivers’ ﬁxation points frame by frame
(33 ms). A preliminary calibration procedure was carried out
for each subject inside the car before starting driving, asking
them to ﬁx their gaze on thirty ﬁxed visual points spread across
the whole scene, in order to get a good accuracy of the eye-
movement recorder. The gazes recorded during the driving task
were manually analyzed, in order to group them into three
diﬀerent categories: road infrastructure, traﬃc vehicles, and
external environment. For each subject, each lap (second and
third), and each condition (Easy and Hard ROAD, Rush and
Normal HOUR) the distribution of eye ﬁxations between the
three categories was calculated in terms of percentage of the total.
Additional Measures
Each car has been equipped with a Video VBOX Pro (Racelogic
Ltd., United Kingdom), a system able to continuously monitor
the cinematic parameters of the car, integrated with GPS data
and videos coming from up to four high-resolution cameras. The
system has been ﬁxed within the car, at the center of the ﬂoor of
the back seats, in order to put it as close as possible to the car
barycenter, while two cameras have been ﬁxed over the top of the
car. The system recorded car parameters (e.g., speed, acceleration,
position, etc.) with a sampling rate of 10 Hz. For the purpose
of the present study, the average speed for each task has been
computed. Also, the cameras’ videos have been used to count the
number of vehicles encountered by the driver during each task.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
6
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
Also, at the end of each task (thus only the HOUR
condition, i.e., Rush vs. Normal, can be compared) the
subjects had to evaluate the experienced workload by ﬁlling
the NASA-TLX questionnaire (Hart and Staveland, 1988).
In particular, the subject had (i) to assess, on a scale from
0 to 100, the impact of six diﬀerent factors (i.e., Mental
demand, Physical demand, Temporal demand, Performance,
Eﬀort, Frustration), and (ii) to assess the more impacting
factor through 15 comparisons between couple of the previously
evaluated factors. The result of this questionnaire is a score
from 0 to 100 corresponding to the driver’s mental workload
perception.
Performed Analyses
Validation of Experimental Design Assumptions
The ﬁrst analysis aimed to validate the assumptions in terms of
experimental design, that is:
(i) The subjects drove during two conditions diﬀerent in terms
of traﬃc, i.e., Rush and Normal hour;
(ii) The circuit was constituted by two segments diﬀerent in
terms of road complexity, thus in terms of diﬃculty, i.e.,
Hard and Easy.
In order to validate the ﬁrst assumption, the number of
vehicles encountered by the experimental subjects and the
average driving speed during the two conditions have been
computed and statistically compared. It is expected that the
number of vehicles is signiﬁcantly higher and the average speed
signiﬁcantly lower during rush hours (Bucchi et al., 2012).
The second assumption has been validated by investigating
the percentage of ﬁxations over the external environment, since
such indicator has been proven to be inversely correlated with
mental workload: the more the experienced workload is, the
less the number of ﬁxations over the external environment is,
since the driver gaze will mostly focus on infrastructure and
vehicles (Costa et al., 2014; de Winter et al., 2014; Lantieri
et al., 2015). Also, we veriﬁed the diﬀerence in terms of mental
workload from a neurophysiological point of view: we computed
the ratio between Theta rhythms over frontal sites (“ThetaF”)
and Alpha rhythms over parietal sites (“AlphaP”), since it
is considered a well-established metric of mental workload
(Borghini et al., 2014). In particular, The ThetaF/AlphaP has
been proven to increase if the mental workload experienced
by the user is increasing as well (Gevins and Smith, 2003;
Holm et al., 2009; Borghini et al., 2015). The metric has been
computed as the ratio between the averaged PSD values in
theta band over the frontal electrodes (AF3, AF4, F3, Fz, F4)
and the averaged PSD values in alpha band over the parietal
electrodes (P3, P7, Pz, P4, P8, POz). Both the analysis have
been performed comparing the two conditions employed to
train the classiﬁer (please see Electroencephalographic Signal
Recording and Processing), i.e., the Easy segment of the 2nd
lap during the Normal condition and the Hard segment of
the 2nd lap during the Rush condition, assumed as the two
conditions characterized by respectively the lowest and highest
mental workload demand.
All the statistical comparisons have been performed through
two-sided Wilcoxon signed rank tests. In fact, data come from
multiple observations on the same subjects, but it is not possible
to assume or robustly assess (the number of observations is
always equal or less than 16) that the observations distribution is
Gaussian, therefore paired non-parametric tests have been used
(Siegel, 1956).
Classiﬁcation Performance
Firstly, a synthetic analysis of the brain features selected by the
algorithm has been performed in order to evaluate any eventual
recurrence of a speciﬁc feature. The initial features domain for
each subject consisted in a matrix of 187 features (11 EEG
channels ∗17 bins of frequency – from IAF-6 Hz to IAF+2 Hz
with a resolution of 0.5 Hz –). Actually, only 99 of these features
can be selected by the algorithm because of the Regions of Interest
deﬁned a priori: 45 features related to frontal Theta and 54 related
to parietal Alpha.
Then, in order to investigate the algorithm (i.e., the
asSWLDA) classiﬁcation accuracy, the analysis of the Area Under
Curve (AUC) of the Receiver Operator Characteristic (ROC)
curve of the classiﬁer has been performed (Bamber, 1975).
In particular, AUC represents a widely used methodology to
test the performance of a binary classiﬁer: the classiﬁcation
performance can be considered good with an AUC higher than
at least 0.7 (Fawcett, 2006). In this case there are actually
two classes in terms of mental workload, i.e., Easy and Hard,
related to the two diﬀerent diﬃculty levels characterizing the
circuit. As previously described, for each subject the training
dataset consisted in the Easy segment of the 2nd lap during
the Normal condition and the Hard segment of the 2nd lap
during the Rush condition (they have been hypothesized the
two conditions characterized by respectively the lowest and
highest cognitive demand), while the testing dataset consisted
of the data of the 3rd lap of both the conditions (Real data).
Therefore, the classiﬁer has been tested shuﬄing the testing
dataset related labels (Random), in order to verify that classiﬁer
performance on measured data (Real data) was signiﬁcantly
higher than that one obtained on random data (Random),
independently from the traﬃc intensity (i.e., both in Rush and
Normal hour conditions). In both the cases (Real and Random),
the time resolution of WLscores is equal to 8 s, obtained as
the best compromise between a high time resolution and good
classiﬁcation performance. Three two-sided Wilcoxon signed
rank tests have been performed between Real and Random data,
one for each HOUR condition (i.e., comparison Real vs. Random
in Normal and Rush hour) and one comparing the Normal and
Rush conditions only in terms of real data. The results of these
multiple comparisons have been validated by applying the False
Discovery Rate (FDR) correction (Benjamini and Hochberg,
1995).
Workload Assessment
Once demonstrated the reliability of the classiﬁcation algorithm
to obtain the EEG-based index of mental workload in the speciﬁc
driving scenarios, the workload scores (WL score) have been
used to evaluate the impact of diﬀerent factors, that is the road
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
7
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
complexity and the traﬃc as well as speciﬁc events along the
driving experience. Depending on the analysis, the EEG-based
WL scores have been analyzed in relation to ET and subjective
data.
Evaluation of traﬃc and road complexity impact
The WL indexes obtained with a time resolution of 8 s from the
testing dataset (i.e., the third lap) were averaged for each subject
and for each condition (i.e., HOUR and ROAD). A Friedman test,
the non-parametric version of the repeated measures ANOVA
(Analysis of Variance), has been performed in order to investigate
any possible eﬀect due to traﬃc and road complexity on the
workload perceived by the subject. Furthermore, since post hoc
tests speciﬁcally designed for Friedman test do not exist but
both the factors have been measured on the same subjects, two
Wilcoxon signed rank tests have been performed in order to
investigate potential within eﬀects among the two factors, i.e.,
HOUR and ROAD.
Also, the results in terms of workload indexes have been
compared with those obtained from ET in order to evaluate the
diﬀerent sensitivity to the phenomenon (i.e., mental workload
variations) of the two technologies. In terms of ET measures,
it has been investigated the percentage of ﬁxations on the road
infrastructure and vehicles, since such indicator has been proven
to be directly correlated with mental workload while driving:
the more the experienced workload is, the more the number of
ﬁxations over the road will be, since the driver gaze will mostly
focus on infrastructure and vehicles (Costa et al., 2014; de Winter
et al., 2014). Multiple two-sided Wilcoxon signed rank tests have
been performed in order to reveal any diﬀerence with respect to
the two investigated factors.
Furthermore, a two-sided Wilcoxon signed rank test has been
performed on the NASA-TLX measures. Please note that for the
continuity of the experiment the questionnaires were ﬁlled by the
subjects only after the tasks end, therefore only the comparison
between Normal and Rush hour has been possible (please refer to
Section “Additional Measures”).
Evaluation of single events impact
On the basis of the average duration of the events among the
subjects during the driving experience, and to homogenize the
measures with respect of this parameter (i.e., event duration), a
ﬁxed window of 20 s for the car event (from the ﬁrst ﬁxation
of the car to its overtaking) and of 10 s for the pedestrian
event (from the ﬁrst ﬁxation of the pedestrian to the acceleration
after its road crossing) has been deﬁned, independently from the
traﬃc and the road complexity. Remembering that the events
were acted only during the third lap of each task repetition,
similar windows corresponding to the same circuit position were
deﬁned during the second lap in order to compare the event’s
happening vs. no-happening. The WL indexes were averaged
for each subject, for each condition (i.e., HOUR and ROAD)
and for each event. Multiple two-sided Wilcoxon signed rank
tests have been performed in order to reveal any diﬀerence (i)
with respect to the events’ happening, and (ii) among the events
types.
RESULTS
The following results are referred to a sample of 16 subjects
(8 with Eye Tracking), since one subject has been discarded
because of technical issues on the EEG data, while three subjects
have been discarded because of no objective diﬀerence in terms
of encountered vehicles (measured through the VBOX cameras)
between the two tasks, i.e., during Rush and Normal hours.
Experimental Design Validation
Figure 4 shows the results of the comparisons between (a) the
number of vehicles encountered by the experimental subjects
and (b) the average driving speed during the two diﬀerent traﬃc
conditions, i.e., during Normal and Rush hours. The performed
statistical analysis revealed a signiﬁcant increasing (p = 0.001)
of vehicles encountered by the experimental subjects and a
signiﬁcant decreasing (p = 0.039) of driving average speed from
FIGURE 4 | On the left (A), a bar graph representing the mean and the standard deviation of vehicles encountered by the participants during the experiments. The
Wilcoxon test showed a signiﬁcantly higher (p = 0.001) number of vehicles during rush hour. On the right (B), a bar graph representing the mean and the standard
deviation of participants driving speed during the experiments. The Wilcoxon test showed a signiﬁcantly lower (p = 0.039) speed during rush hour. The statistical
tests showing a signiﬁcant effect.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
8
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
FIGURE 5 | The bar graph represents the mean and the standard deviation of
the percentage of drivers’ eye ﬁxations along the two different segments of the
circuit. The Wilcoxon test showed a signiﬁcant reduction (p = 0.046) of such
percentage during the circuit segment characterized by hard complexity. The
statistical tests showing a signiﬁcant effect.
Normal to Rush hours, validating the experimental hypothesis
about the two diﬀerent conditions of traﬃc made a priori on the
basis of the General Plan of Urban Traﬃc of Bologna (see The
Experimental Protocol).
Figure 5 shows the results in terms of percentage of ﬁxations
over the external environment between the Easy and Hard
segments of the circuit, since such indicator has been proven
to be inversely correlated with mental workload. The performed
statistical analysis revealed a signiﬁcant decreasing (p = 0.046)
of driver gazes over the external environment, validating the
experimental hypothesis about the two diﬀerent conditions of
diﬃculty made a priori on the basis of scientiﬁc literature (see
The Experimental Protocol).
Figure 6 shows the results in terms of ThetaF/AlphaP value
between the Easy and Hard segments of the circuit, since
FIGURE 6 | The bar graph represents the mean and the standard deviation of
the EEG-based ThetaF/AlphaP indicator along the two different segments of
the circuit. The Wilcoxon test showed a signiﬁcant increasing (p = 0.009) of
such indicator during the circuit segment characterized by hard complexity.
The statistical tests showing a signiﬁcant effect.
such ratio has been proven to be a physiological indicator
directly correlated to mental workload. The performed statistical
analysis revealed a signiﬁcant increasing (p = 0.009) of the
proposed index, validating the assumption about the diﬀerent
cognitive demand related to the two conditions, made a priori
on the basis of scientiﬁc literature (see The experimental
Protocol).
Classiﬁcation Performance
Figure 7 shows the distribution of the features, and the relative
frequency of selection, chosen by the asSWLDA during the
training phase. The analysis of features selected by the algorithm
revealed that the asSWLDA selected on average 4 features
per subject, coming from 3 of the 11 channels available. The
frequency bins, actually equal to 17 because included between
IAF-6 Hz and IAF+2 Hz with a resolution of 0.5 Hz, have been
grouped into four areas of interest: Lower Theta [IAF – 6 ÷ IAF –
4], Upper Theta [IAF – 4 ÷ IAF – 2], Lower Alpha [IAF – 2 ÷
IAF] and Upper Alpha [IAF ÷ IAF + 2]. The results show that
Lower Theta over F4 and Upper Alpha over POz have been used
for more than the 50% of subjects.
The AUC analysis (Figure 8) revealed that, by using such
approach, it has been possible to achieve mean AUC values of
0.744 ± 0.13 for the Normal hour and of 0.727 ± 0.06 for the
Rush hour. In particular, the two Wilcoxon tests demonstrated
that the classiﬁer performance on the Real data was signiﬁcantly
higher than on Random data in both the conditions (respectively
p = 0.01 and p = 0.0005). Also, there were no signiﬁcant
diﬀerences (p = 0.64) in terms of AUC values on Real data
between Normal and Rush hours, in other words the classiﬁcation
performance was not dependent on the traﬃc condition. Because
of the three repeated tests, the False Discovery Rate correction
has been performed: with respect to the p-values obtained and
ordered (0.0005, 0.01, and 0.64), the three corrected q-values are
respectively 0.0015, 0.015, and 0.64, thus the ﬁrst two results are
still signiﬁcant.
Workload Assessment
Evaluation of Trafﬁc and Road Complexity Impact
Figure 9 shows the results of the non-parametrical statistical
analysis in terms of eﬀects of the two investigated factors, i.e., the
traﬃc (HOUR) and the road complexity (ROAD), on the mental
workload experienced by the drivers. In particular, the Friedman
test at the top of Figure 9A highlights a signiﬁcant main eﬀect
(p = 0.00001) among the diﬀerent factors: the mental workload
signiﬁcantly increased because of the higher road complexity (i.e.,
from Easy to Hard), and even more because of the higher traﬃc
intensity (i.e., from Normal to Rush hours). The Wilcoxon tests
performed in order to investigate any within eﬀect showed two
signiﬁcant main eﬀects in term of workload increasing if both
complexity [bottom left (Figure 9B), ROAD, p = 0.0038] and
traﬃc [bottom right (Figure 9C), HOUR, p = 0.0032] increase.
Figures 10, 11 show the results of the Wilcoxon tests
comparing the sensitivity of ET measures with respect to EEG-
based ones. For these analyses the EEG-based WL scores of only
the subjects wearing also the Eye Tracker (eight of sixteen) have
been considered, in order to make the results comparable (i.e.,
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
9
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
FIGURE 7 | The colormap summarizes the frequency of the selection of each feature for the whole subjects’ sample. The initial features domain for each subject
consisted of a matrix of 187 features (11 EEG channels ∗17 bins of frequency – from IAF – 6 Hz to IAF+2 Hz with a resolution of 0.5 Hz –). Actually, only 99 of these
features can be selected by the algorithm, because of the Regions of Interest deﬁned a priori: 45 features related to frontal Theta and 54 related to parietal Alpha. For
a synthetic and effective representation, the frequency bins, actually equal to 17 because included between IAF-6 Hz and IAF+2 Hz with a resolution of 0.5 Hz, have
been grouped into four areas of interest: Lower Theta [IAF – 6 ÷ IAF – 4], Upper Theta [IAF – 4 ÷ IAF – 2], Lower Alpha [IAF – 2 ÷ IAF] and Upper Alpha
[IAF ÷ IAF + 2]. The results show that Lower Theta over F4 and Upper Alpha over POz have been used for more than the 50% of subjects.
both the measures have been collected during same experience).
In particular:
• Figure 10: in terms of ROAD complexity, while the EEG-
based measures have been able to signiﬁcantly discriminate
(p = 0.008) the two conditions at least during Normal
hour, the ET-based ones have not been able to show any
signiﬁcant diﬀerence both during Normal and Rush hours;
• Figure 11: in terms of traﬃc HOUR, while the EEG-based
measures have been able to signiﬁcantly discriminate the
two conditions both along Easy (p = 0.019) and Hard
(p = 0.039) segments, the ET-based ones have been able
to signiﬁcantly discriminate Normal and Rush hours only
along the Hard segment (p = 0.0192).
Finally, Figure 12 shows the results in terms of NASA-TLX
scores, revealing that there is not any signiﬁcant diﬀerence in
terms of workload subjectively assessed between the Normal and
Rush hour conditions.
Evaluation of Single Events Impact
Figure 13 shows the results in terms of EEG-based WL
scores about how the presence of a speciﬁc event impacts the
mental workload of the driver, with respect to the diﬀerent
experimental conditions. In terms of external events (the
condition EVENT is referred to the event actually happened
during the 3rd lap, the condition NO EVENT is referred
to the same circuit portion during the 2nd lap when no
events were acted), the pedestrian crossing the road induced
a signiﬁcantly higher workload only during the Normal hour
along the Hard circuit segment (Wilcoxon test’s p = 0.037),
while the car induced a signiﬁcantly higher workload along
both the Easy and Hard circuit segments but only during
Normal hour (respectively Wilcoxon test’s p = 0.007 and
p = 0.008).
Considering only the condition “EVENT,” despite a decreasing
trend from Easy to Hard segments, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences
(p > 0.05) have been found for each event during the same traﬃc
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
10
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
FIGURE 8 | The bar graph represents the mean and the standard deviation of AUC values obtained in discriminating the Easy and Hard circuit segments. Both in
Normal and Rush hour conditions, the classiﬁcation performance obtained by training the classiﬁer with real data (solid color) have been signiﬁcantly higher
(respectively p = 0.01 and p = 0.0005) than by using random data (lines pattern), achieving mean AUC values of respectively 0.74 and 0.73. The statistical tests
showing a signiﬁcant effect.
condition (HOUR). However, if considering the same diﬃculty
level (ROAD), all the events induced a signiﬁcant workload
increasing during Rush hours, except the pedestrian along the
Easy segment (Pedestrian Hard: p = 0.009; Car Easy: p = 0.023;
Car Hard: p = 0.002).
DISCUSSION
Since the impact of drivers’ errors in terms of human lives and
costs is very high and the next future previsions are even worse
(World Health Organization, 2015), the relationship between
human errors and driving performance impairment due to a high
mental workload has been deeply investigated in the automotive
domain. Recent technological advancements as well as the growth
of disciplines such as Neuroscience and Neuroergonomics now
allow to record human neurophysiological signals, such as in this
study brain activity through Electroencephalographic technique,
in a robust way also outside the laboratory, and to obtain
from them objective neurometrics of human mental states (i.e.,
workload) (Aricò et al., 2017c, 2018). The present work aimed to
validate a machine-learning approach, i.e., the asSWLDA (Aricò
et al., 2016a), for the objective assessment of human mental
workload while driving in real settings, as well as its integration
with traditional tools (e.g., questionnaires, car parameters, eye
tracking) in order to evaluate the impact of diﬀerent factors (road
complexity, traﬃc intensity, external events), thus suggesting new
innovative tools for enhancing research in road safety. In order to
achieve these objectives, 20 young subjects have been involved in
a real driving task along urban roads, performed under diﬀerent
traﬃc conditions (rush hour and not), driving through diﬀerent
road types (main and secondary streets) and facing to external
events.
Firstly, the experiments have been designed making two
a priori assumptions:
(1) the experiments have been conducted in two diﬀerent
conditions of traﬃc intensity, depending on the hours (i.e.,
normal and rush hour) of the day; the experimental design
initially referred to the General Plan of Urban Traﬃc of
Bologna;
(2) the circuit consisted of two segments of diﬀerent diﬃculty,
i.e., Easy and Hard, because of the related road complexity
(Harms, 1991; Verwey, 2000; Paxion et al., 2014).
The statistical analysis performed on the average speed
of the experimental subjects and the number of vehicles
encountered during the experiments (Figure 4) validated the
Assumption 1: in fact, the subjects encountered a signiﬁcantly
higher (p = 0.001) number of vehicles and they drove at a
signiﬁcantly lower (p = 0.039) speed during the rush hours, as
expected from scientiﬁc literature (Bucchi et al., 2012). Statistical
analysis of driver’s eye ﬁxations over the external environment
(Figure 5) and physiological brain patterns (Figure 6) validated
the Assumption 2: in fact the drivers’ gazes over the external
environment (such index inversely correlates with mental
workload; de Winter et al., 2014; Lantieri et al., 2015) have been
signiﬁcantly lower (p = 0.046) along the circuit segment that was
hypothesized as Hard, while the ratio between frontal theta and
parietal alpha rhythms signiﬁcantly increased (p = 0.009). These
results conﬁrmed the properness of the experimental design.
Nevertheless, the analysis of encountered vehicles, determined
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
11
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
FIGURE 9 | At the top (A), the Friedman test highlighting a signiﬁcant main effect (p = 0.00001), in terms of mental workload increasing among the different factors.
At the bottom, on the left (B) the Wilcoxon test on the factor ROAD and on the right (C) the same test on the factor HOUR, showing how both the factors produced
a signiﬁcant mental workload increasing (respectively p = 0.004 and p = 0.003). The statistical tests showing a signiﬁcant effect.
FIGURE 10 | The Wilcoxon tests performed to investigate eventual sensitivity differences between Eye-Tracking [left (A)] and EEG [right (B)] measures, considered
on the same subjects, in relation to ROAD complexity showed that EEG-based measures have been able to signiﬁcantly discriminate (p = 0.008) the two conditions
at least during Normal hour, while the ET-based ones have not been able to show any signiﬁcant difference both during Normal and Rush hours. The statistical tests
showing a signiﬁcant effect.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
12
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
FIGURE 11 | The Wilcoxon tests performed to investigate eventual sensitivity differences between Eye-Tracking [left (A)] and EEG [right, (B)] measures, considered
on the same subjects, in relation to trafﬁc intensity (i.e., HOUR) showed that, while the EEG-based measures have been able to signiﬁcantly discriminate the two
conditions both along Easy (p = 0.019) and Hard (p = 0.04) segments, the ET-based ones have been able to signiﬁcantly discriminate Normal and Rush hours only
along the Hard segment (p = 0.02). The statistical tests showing a signiﬁcant effect.
FIGURE 12 | The bar graph represents the mean and the standard deviation
of NASA-TLX scores, i.e., the subjective assessment of the mental workload
experienced by the participants of the circuit. The Wilcoxon test does not
reveal any signiﬁcant difference in terms of workload subjectively assessed by
the subjects between the Normal and Rush hour conditions.
through videos from the VBOX videos, led to discard three
subjects because of no diﬀerences between rush and normal
hours (see Results). Therefore, this validation approach should
be taken into account for future works in real driving conditions,
where external conditions and events are less controllable, even
unpredictable, if compared with laboratory experiments.
Once validated the experiment in terms of diﬀerences between
the road and traﬃc conditions, the EEG-based Workload
measures have been validated. In particular, the analysis of
AUC related to the asSWLDA-based classiﬁer demonstrated that
the adopted approach achieves considerable performance, i.e.,
AUCs > 0.7 (Fawcett, 2006). More in detail, the AUC analysis
(Figure 8) revealed that it has been possible to achieve mean
AUC values of 0.74 for the Normal hour and of 0.73 for the
Rush hour, signiﬁcantly higher than a random classiﬁcation in
both the conditions (respectively p = 0.01 and p = 0.0005). Also,
there were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences (p = 0.64) in terms of AUC
values on Real data between Normal and Rush hours. All the
previous results have been also conﬁrmed by the correction for
multiple comparisons, in this case the False Discovery Rate. It is
also true that, within the machine-learning theory, AUCs greater
than 0.7 are considered remarkable if compared with a random
distribution that is assumed to produce AUCs equal to 0.5. In the
present study, the performance of the classiﬁer on randomized
data achieved AUCs values of about 0.6. A possible explanation
could be that the random value would be closer and closer to
0.5 only if the number of repetitions tends to inﬁnite, however,
this result undoubtedly encourages research about improving the
proposed method. Of course, classiﬁcation performance of about
0.75 are anyway remarkable, in particular because of the novelty
of such application (the EEG-based Workload index is provided
with a time resolution equal to 8 s) and the real settings, where
mental states assessment is more prone to misclassiﬁcation: in
fact, it is plausible to assume that outside the high controlled
laboratory settings, the user experiences more complex mental
states that consist of multiple diﬀerent components having the
potential to inﬂuence neurophysiological signals used to infer a
speciﬁc state.
The analysis of the patterns of features selected by the
algorithm during its training phase (Figure 7) provided
interesting insights about its usability: in fact, the asSWLDA
selected on average 4 discriminant features for each subject, and
even more interesting, by involving 3 of the 11 available channels.
It means that, once calibrated the system on a speciﬁc user,
it would be able to work online during the driving experience
involving only three EEG channels, in other words reducing
signiﬁcantly its invasiveness and increasing wearability, two
critical aspects for applications outside the laboratory.
At this point, the asSWLDA output, in terms of EEG-based
Workload index, has been used to evaluate the eﬀects of road
complexity, traﬃc intensity and external events on drivers’
workload (Figure 9).
The Friedman ANOVA test (please see Figure) shows the
results in terms of eﬀects of the two investigated factors,
i.e., the traﬃc (HOUR) and the road complexity (ROAD),
on the mental workload experienced by the drivers: both the
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
13
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
traﬃc and road complexity contributed to signiﬁcantly increase
(main eﬀect: p = 0.00001; Wilcoxon tests respectively: HOUR,
p = 0.0032; ROAD: p = 0.0038) the mental workload. In other
words, the drivers’ workload increased if traﬃc increased as well
independently from the road complexity. At the same time, the
drivers’ workload increased while driving along more complex
roads independently from the traﬃc intensity. These results have
to be considered with respect to the experimental task: actually,
the Hard segment was a three-lanes main street, that with
respect to a one-lane main street (Easy segment) implies several
additional decisions and actions, such as eventual car overtaking
as well as looking at rear-view mirrors because of possible cars
coming on lateral lanes. Of course, these actions increase with
traﬃc increasing, because of the higher number of vehicles
along the circuit (as demonstrated by Video analysis, please see
Figure 4). Apparently, the Easy segment should not suﬀer traﬃc
increasing, since being a one-lane segment the overtaking are
very limited and drivers have not to frequently check rear-view
mirrors since they cannot change lane. Nevertheless, because of
the higher number of vehicles along the circuit during rush hours,
the drivers had to continuously monitor eventual preceding cars,
adapting safety distance and speed (in fact average speed during
rush hour has been lower and drivers’ gazes on infrastructure
and vehicles higher also along Easy segment). These actions also
induced a no-negligible workload increasing, giving a possible
justiﬁcation of the high accident rate along rural roads (Shankar
et al., 1995), that are generally considered “Easy to drive” if
compared with urban main roads (Harms, 1991; Paxion et al.,
2014), thus mismatching the driver’s expectations.
Very interestingly but not surprisingly, the neurophysiological
measures showed a signiﬁcantly higher sensitivity with respect
to the ET ones (Figures 10, 11) in discriminating the diﬀerent
impact of road complexity and traﬃc intensity on mental
workload. It is important to consider that ET measures were
available only for a reduced group of the experimental sample
(8 of 16 subjects), therefore it could have aﬀected the performance
of such measures in discriminating the mental workload related
to diﬀerent factors. However, the paired statistical analysis
highlighted that on the same subjects, EEG-based measures were
more sensitive to workload ﬂuctuations. Their high sensitivity has
been pointed out also with respect to subjective measures (i.e.,
NASA-TLX questionnaires, Figure 12), that on the contrary were
not able to discriminate (p = 0.23) normal from rush hours.
Finally, EEG-based workload measures revealed a signiﬁcant
workload increasing (p < 0.05) related to both the investigated
events, that is the car and the pedestrian crossing the
road, especially in normal hours independently from the
road complexity. Instead, no signiﬁcant workload increasing
were associated to the event during rush hours, despite a
signiﬁcantly higher workload in comparison with the same events
during normal hours (Figure 13). Although for this analysis
neurophysiological measures are not integrated with additional
ones (it was impossible to collect subjective data related to
speciﬁc events, while from the ET point of view it was possible
to assess only if the event was been perceived or not), it is
possible to deduce that external events could lead to eventually
risky situations especially with low traﬃc (normal hours). In fact,
although a lower absolute workload if compared with high traﬃc
FIGURE 13 | The bar graphs show the mean values and the standard deviation of the EEG-based WL scores related to the different events along the various
experimental conditions. In particular, the results are divided per events category, i.e., Pedestrian on the left (A) and Car on the right (B). In both the cases, the
condition EVENT (solid color) is referred to the event actually happened during the 3rd lap, the condition NO EVENT (lines pattern) is referred to the same circuit
portion during the 2nd lap when no events were acted. The Wilcoxon tests revealed a signiﬁcant workload increasing (one red asterisk stands for p < 0.05; two red
asterisks stand for p < 0.01) related to both the investigated events, that is the car and the pedestrian crossing the road, especially in normal hours independently
from the road complexity. Instead, no signiﬁcant workload increasing were associated to the event during rush hours, despite a signiﬁcantly higher workload in
comparison with the same events during normal hours.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
14
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
condition, they are characterized by an immediate cognitive
demand increase, that could become dangerous if not expected
by the driver.
Nevertheless, the main limit that aﬀects the present study
is the algorithm calibration with data coming from the task
itself and recorded in very similar conditions. From one side, it
could be argued that in everyday life context such a calibration
would be unfeasible; from the other side it could be argued that
the proposed algorithm is not classifying the targeted mental
state, i.e., mental workload, but only two conditions that are
very similar. Regarding the calibration, actually it is one of
the main still open issues in transferring machine learning
approaches from research to applied ﬁeld: several solutions have
been explored, such as cross-task calibration or employment of
unsupervised algorithms, but the problem is still open and needs
further investigation (Aricò et al., 2018). However, the present
work did not aim at addressing such issue, but at investigating
the possibility of applying a machine-learning algorithm for
the mental workload evaluation, already validated in other
domains, also in automotive applications. The highly challenging
conditions of a “real driving experiment” with twenty subjects,
jointly with the employment of high-quality instrumentation,
already make the present work very innovative and of interest.
Secondly, it is true that the algorithm has been calibrated
on two conditions and employed in classifying two similar
conditions, but it is also important to consider that calibration
data for each subject came from two diﬀerent repetitions (please
refer to Section “Electroencephalographic Signal Recording and
Processing” for more information): in fact data recorded during
the Easy segment of Normal hour (2nd lap) have been used as
EASY CLASS, while data recorded during the Hard segment of
Rush hour (2nd lap) have been used as HARD CLASS. Even if
assuming that Easy segment of Normal hour and Hard segment
of Rush hour of 2nd and 3rd lap were intrinsically similar, no
data from Hard segment of Normal hour and Easy segment of
Rush hour have been used to train the classiﬁer, therefore their
coherent classiﬁcation (e.g., Hard segment of Normal hour is not
easier than the Easy segment during the same hour) is a mere
and appreciable result of the proposed algorithm. Undoubtedly,
mental workload is a Human Factor concept hard to deﬁne and
even worse to measure (Moray, 2013), and confounds arising
from diﬀerent mental states are probably present, however, the
results of the present study are already remarkable, especially if
considering previous results obtained by the employment of the
same algorithm in diﬀerent applications (Aricò et al., 2016a,b,
Borghini et al., 2017b,c).
It is important to remark how it is possible to achieve
this kind of results only thanks to the proposed methodology:
in fact, subjective measures cannot be gathered with high
time resolution and without interfering with the main task,
brieﬁng and debrieﬁng sessions can be performed only before
and after the experience, while eye-tracker as well as other
neurophysiological metrics (for example the ThetaF/AlphaP
showed in Figure 6) are able to provide only an overall
evaluation about a “long” condition. On the contrary, the
proposed methodology is able to overcome these limitations,
providing workload assessment with high time resolution (i.e.,
in this case 8 s) and thus allowing to evaluate also speciﬁc
events.
In conclusion, the obtained results appear very interesting in
terms of understanding driver’s behaviors and its relationship
with road environment, highlighting the added value of
neurophysiological measures in providing insights about human
mind that are not obtainable, or at least diﬃcult to obtain, with
traditional approaches. Certainly, further analyses are necessary
in order to validate this multimodal approach with a larger
sample of subjects, exploring the impact of other factors, such as
diﬀerent events, road signage and so on, and involving additional
tools typical of road safety research, as well as exploring the
possibility of calibrating the proposed algorithm without any
task-related data.
CONCLUSION
The present study, through a real driving experiment, aimed
to validate a methodology able to infer driver’s mental
workload on the basis of his/her brain activity through
Electroencephalographic
technique.
Once
validated,
such
methodology has been successfully employed to evaluate the
impact of diﬀerent factors, speciﬁcally the road complexity, the
traﬃc intensity (depending on the hour of the day), and two
speciﬁc events (a pedestrian crossing the road and a car entering
in the traﬃc ﬂow), on the drivers’ experienced mental workload.
The analyses have been supported by information coming from
subjective measures, drivers’ eye movements tracking and car
parameters. The results demonstrated (i) the reliability and
eﬀectiveness of the proposed methodology based on human
EEG signals to objectively measure driver’s mental workload
with respect to diﬀerent road factors, and (ii) the added value of
neurophysiological measures in providing insights about human
mind while dealing with tasks that are diﬃcult or even impossible
to obtain by using traditional approaches. In conclusion, other
than the speciﬁc obtained results, the present work breaks new
ground for the integration of these new methodologies, i.e.,
neurophysiological measures, with traditional approaches in
order to enhance and extend research on drivers’ behaviors and
road safety.
ETHICS STATEMENT
This
study
was
carried
out
in
accordance
with
the
recommendations of the Good Clinical Practice (International
Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for
Pharmaceuticals for Human Use) with written informed consent
from all subjects. All subjects gave written informed consent in
accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The protocol was
approved by the ‘University of Bologna.’
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
GDF is the main author of the paper. Also, he was actively
involved within the experiments as well as in the EEG data
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
15
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
analysis
and
interpretation.
PA,
GB,
and
NS
supported
the
experimental
design,
the
data
recording,
the
EEG
data
analysis,
and
the
manuscript
writing.
PL
and
SP
supported
the
experimental
design
and
the
results
interpretation,
providing
their
contribute
in
particular
about the Human Factor concepts. VV, CL, AB, and AS
were in charge of experiments planning, they contributed
actively to the experiments execution, they analyzed Eye
Tracking and subjective measures analysis, and supported
the
results
interpretation.
FB
coordinated
the
research
group, from the experimental design to the manuscript
editing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to the Unipol Group Spa and,
in particular, ALFAEVOLUTION TECHNOLOGY, for the
considerable help given in the research study. This work has
been also co-ﬁnanced by the European Commission through the
Horizon2020 project H2020-MG-2016 Simulator of behavioral
aspects for safer transport, “SimuSafe,” (GA n. 723386), and the
project “BrainSafeDrive: A Technology to Detect Mental States
During Drive for Improving the Safety of the Road” (Italy-
Sweden collaboration) with a grant of Ministero dell’Istruzione
dell’Università e della Ricerca della Repubblica Italiana.
REFERENCES
Allnutt, M. F. (1987). Human factors in accidents. Br. J. Anaesth. 59, 856–864.
doi: 10.1093/bja/59.7.856
Aricò, P., Borghini, G., Di Flumeri, G., and Babiloni, F. (2017a). Method for
Estimating a Mental State, in Particular a Workload, and Related Apparatus.
EP3143933 A1, ﬁled September 14, 2016, and issued March 22, 2017. Available
at: http://www.google.it/patents/EP3143933A1
Aricò, P., Borghini, G., Di Flumeri, G., Bonelli, S., Golfetti, A., Graziani, I., et al.
(2017b). Human factors and neurophysiological metrics in air traﬃc control: a
critical review. IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng. 10, 250–263. doi: 10.1109/RBME.2017.
2694142
Aricò, P., Borghini, G., Di Flumeri, G., Sciaraﬀa, N., Colosimo, A., and Babiloni, F.
(2017c). Passive BCI in operational environments: insights, recent advances,
and future trends. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 64, 1431–1436. doi: 10.1109/
TBME.2017.2694856
Aricò, P., Borghini, G., Di Flumeri, G., Colosimo, A., Bonelli, S., Golfetti, A.,
et al. (2016a). Adaptive automation triggered by eeg-based mental workload
index: a passive brain-computer interface application in realistic air traﬃc
control environment. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10:539. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2016.
00539
Aricò, P., Borghini, G., Di Flumeri, G., Colosimo, A., Pozzi, S., and Babiloni, F.
(2016b). A passive brain–computer interface application for the mental
workload assessment on professional air traﬃc controllers during realistic air
traﬃc control tasks. Progr. Brain Res. 228, 295–328. doi: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2016.
04.021
Aricò, P., Borghini, G., Di Flumeri, G., Colosimo, A., Graziani, I., Imbert, J. P.,
et al. (2015). “Reliability over time of EEG-based mental workload evaluation
during Air Traﬃc Management (ATM) tasks,” in Proceedings of the 2015 37th
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society (EMBC) (New York, NY: IEEE), 7242–7245. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.
2015.7320063
Aricò, P., Borghini, G., Di Flumeri, G., Sciaraﬀa, N., and Babiloni, F. (2018).
Passive BCI beyond the lab: current trends and future directions. Physiol. Meas.
39:08TR02. doi: 10.1088/1361-6579/aad57e
Bamber, D. (1975). The area above the ordinal dominance graph and the area below
the receiver operating characteristic graph. J. Mathemat. Psychol. 12, 387–415.
doi: 10.1016/0022-2496(75)90001-2
Benjamini, Y., and Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery
rate: a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. J. R. Stat.
Soc. Ser. B (Methodological) 57, 289–300. doi: 10.1111/j.2517-6161.1995.
tb02031.x
Borghini, G., Aricò, P., Di Flumeri, G., and Babiloni, F. (2017a). Industrial
Neuroscience in Aviation: Evaluation of Mental States in Aviation Personnel.
Cham: Springer International Publishing Springer. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-
58598-7
Borghini, G., Aricò, P., Di Flumeri, G., Cartocci, G., Colosimo, A., Bonelli, S.,
et al. (2017b). EEG-based cognitive control behaviour assessment: an ecological
study with professional air traﬃc controllers. Sci. Rep. 7:547. doi: 10.1038/
s41598-017-00633-7
Borghini, G., Aricò, P., Di Flumeri, G., Sciaraﬀa, N., Colosimo, A., Herrero, M.,
et al. (2017c). A new perspective for the training assessment: machine learning-
based neurometric for augmented user’s evaluation. Front. Neurosci. 11:325.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2017.00325
Borghini, G., Aricò, P., Di Flumeri, G., Salinari, S., Colosimo, A., Bonelli, S.,
and Babiloni, F. (2015). “Avionic technology testing by using a cognitive
neurometric index: a study with professional helicopter pilots,” in Proceedings
of the Engineering in Medicine et al. (EMBC), 2015 37th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE (New York, NY: IEEE), 6182–6185. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.
2015.7319804
Borghini, G., Astolﬁ, L., Vecchiato, G., Mattia, D., and Babiloni, F. (2014).
Measuring neurophysiological signals in aircraft pilots and car drivers for the
assessment of mental workload, fatigue and drowsiness. Neurosci. Biobehav.
Rev. 44, 58–75. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.10.003
Borghini, G., Vecchiato, G., Toppi, J., Astolﬁ, L., Maglione, A., Isabella, R.,
et al. (2012). “Assessment of mental fatigue during car driving by using
high resolution EEG activity and neurophysiologic indices,” in Proceedins
of the Conference Proceedings: Annual International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, San Diego, CA. 6442–6445. doi:
10.1109/EMBC.2012.6347469
Brookhuis, K. A., and de Waard, D. (2010). Monitoring drivers’ mental workload
in driving simulators using physiological measures. Accid. Anal. Prevent. 42,
898–903. doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2009.06.001
Bucchi, A., Sangiorgi, C., and Vignali, V. (2012). Traﬃc psychology and driver
behavior. Proc. Soc. Behav. Sci. 53, 972–979. doi: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.09.946
Cestac, J., Paran, F., and Delhomme, P. (2014). Drive as i say, not as i drive:
inﬂuence of injunctive and descriptive norms on speeding intentions among
young drivers. Trans. Res. Part F Traﬃc Psychol. Behav. 23, 44–56. doi: 10.1016/
j.trf.2013.12.006
Costa, M., Simone, A., Vignali, V., Lantieri, C., Bucchi, A., and Dondi, G. (2014).
Looking behavior for vertical road signs. Transport. Res. Part F Traﬃc Psychol.
Behav. 23, 147–155. doi: 10.1016/j.trf.2014.01.003
De Waard, D. (1996). The Measurement of Drivers’ Mental Workload. Groningen:
University of Groningen, Traﬃc Research Centre.
de Winter, J. C. F., Happee, R., Martens, M. H., and Stanton, N. A. (2014). Eﬀects of
adaptive cruise control and highly automated driving on workload and situation
awareness: a review of the empirical evidence. Transport. Res. Part F Traﬃc
Psychol. Behav. 27, 196–217. doi: 10.1016/j.trf.2014.06.016
Delorme, A., and Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis
of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent component analysis. J.
Neurosci. Methods 134, 9–21. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2003.10.009
Di Flumeri, G., Aricò, P., Borghini, G., Colosimo, A., and Babiloni, F. (2016).
“A new regression-based method for the eye blinks artifacts correction in the
eeg signal, without using any EOG channel,” in Proceedings of the Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society, Orlando, FL.
Di Flumeri, G., Aricò, P., Borghini, G., Sciaraﬀa, N., Vignali, V., Lantieri, C., et al.
(2018). “Mental workload assessment as taxonomic tool for neuroergonomics,”
in Neuroergonomics. The Brain at Work and in Everyday Life, 1st Edn, eds H.
Ayaz and F. Dehais (Amsterdam: Elsevier).
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
16
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
Di Flumeri, G., Borghini, G., Aricò, P., Colosimo, A., Pozzi, S., Bonelli, S., et al.
(2015). “On the use of cognitive neurometric indexes in aeronautic and air
traﬃc management environments,” in Proceedings of the Symbiotic Interaction:
4th International Workshop, Symbiotic 2015, Berlin, Germany. doi: 10.1007/
978-3-319-24917-9_5
Dienes, Z. (2004). Assumptions of subjective measures of unconscious mental
states: higher order thoughts and bias. J. Consciousn. Stud. 11, 25–45.
Elul, R. (1969). Gaussian behavior of the electroencephalogram: changes during
performance of mental task. Science 164, 328–331. doi: 10.1126/science.164.
3877.328
Fawcett, T. (2006). An introduction to ROC analysis. Pattern Recogn. Lett. 27,
861–874. doi: 10.1016/j.patrec.2005.10.010
Gevins, A., and Smith, M. E. (2003). Neurophysiological measures of cognitive
workload during human-computer interaction. Theor. Issues Ergon. Sci. 4,
113–131. doi: 10.1080/14639220210159717
Göhring, D., Latotzky, D., Wang, M., and Rojas, R. (2013). “Semi-autonomous car
control using brain computer interfaces,” in Intelligent Autonomous Systems 12,
vol. 194, eds S. Lee, H. Cho, K.-J. Yoon, and J. Lee (Berlin: Springer), 393–408.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-33932-5_37
Gopher, D., and Braune, R. (1984). On the psychophysics of workload: why bother
with subjective measures? Hum. Fact. J. Hum. Fact. Ergon. Soc. 26, 519–532.
doi: 10.1177/001872088402600504
Hansen, F. (2007). Human error: a concept analysis. J. Air Transport. 11, 61–77.
Harms, L. (1991). Variation in drivers’ cognitive load. Eﬀects of driving through
village areas and rural junctions. Ergonomics 34, 151–160. doi: 10.1080/
00140139108967303
Hart, S. G., and Staveland, L. E. (1988). “Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load
Index): results of empirical and theoretical research,” in Advances in Psychology,
Vol. 52, eds P. A. Hancock and N. Meshkati (North-Holland: Human Mental
Workload), 139–183. doi: 10.1016/S0166-4115(08)62386-9
Holm, A., Lukander, K., Korpela, J., Sallinen, M., and Müller, K. M. I. (2009).
Estimating brain load from the EEG. Sci. World J. 9, 639–651. doi: 10.1100/
tsw.2009.83
Horowitz, A. D., and Dingus, T. A. (1992). Warning signal design: a key human
factors issue in an in-vehicle front-to-rear-end collision warning system.
Proc. Hum. Fact. Ergon. Soc. Annu. Meet. 36, 1011–1013. doi: 10.1177/
154193129203601320
Kaplan, S., Guvensan, M. A., Yavuz, A. G., and Karalurt, Y. (2015). Driver behavior
analysis for safe driving: a survey. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transport. Syst. 16,
3017–3032. doi: 10.1109/TITS.2015.2462084
Kirk, R. E. (2015). “Experimental design,” in The Blackwell Encyclopedia of
Sociology, ed. G. Ritzer (Oxford: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.), doi: 10.1002/
9781405165518.wbeose087.pub2
Klimesch, W. (1999). EEG alpha and theta oscillations reﬂect cognitive and
memory performance: a review and analysis. Brain Res. Rev. 29, 169–195.
doi: 10.1016/S0165-0173(98)00056-3
Kohlmorgen, J., Dornhege, G., Braun, M., Blankertz, B., Müller, K. L-R., Curio, G.,
et al. (2007). “Improving human performance in a real operating environment
through real-time mental workload detection,” in Towards Brain-Computer
Interfacing, eds G. Dornhege, J. del R. Millá, T. Hinterberger, D. McFarland,
and K.-Robert Mülle (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press).
Kong, W., Lin, W., Babiloni, F., Hu, S., and Borghini, G. (2015). Investigating
driver fatigue versus alertness using the granger causality network. Sensors 15,
19181–19198. doi: 10.3390/s150819181
Kong, W., Zhou, Z., Jiang, B., Babiloni, F., and Borghini, G. (2017). Assessment
of
driving
fatigue
based
on
intra/inter-region
phase
synchronization.
Neurocomputing 219, 474–482. doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2016.09.057
Lantieri, C., Lamperti, R., Simone, A., Costa, M., Vignali, V., Sangiorgi, C., et al.
(2015). Gateway design assessment in the transition from high to low speed
areas. Transport. Res. Part F Traﬃc Psychol. Behav. 34, 41–53. doi: 10.1016/j.trf.
2015.07.017
Lees, M. N., Cosman, J. D., Lee, J. D., Fricke, N., and Rizzo, M. (2010).
Translating cognitive neuroscience to the Driver’s operational environment:
a neuroergonomic approach. Am. J. Psychol. 123, 391–411. doi: 10.5406/
amerjpsyc.123.4.0391
Lin, C.-T., Ko, L.-W., and Shen, T.-K. (2009). Computational intelligent brain
computer interaction and its applications on driving cognition. IEEE Computat.
Intell. Mag. 4, 32–46. doi: 10.1109/MCI.2009.934559
Lin, C.-T., Wu, R.-C., Jung, T.-P., Liang, S.-F., and Huang, T.-Y. (2005). Estimating
driving performance based on EEG spectrum analysis. EURASIP J. Adv. Sig.
Process. 2005:521368. doi: 10.1155/ASP.2005.3165
Maglione, A., Borghini, G., Aricò, P., Borgia, F., Graziani, I., Colosimo, A., et al.
(2014). “Evaluation of the workload and drowsiness during car driving by using
high resolution EEG activity and neurophysiologic indices,” in Proceedings
of the Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, Chicago, IL, 6238–6241. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2014.
6945054
Michail, E., Kokonozi, A., Chouvarda, I., and Maglaveras, N. (2008). EEG and HRV
Markers Of Sleepiness and Loss of Control During Car Driving. New York, NY:
IEEE. doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2008.4649724
Moray, N. (ed). (2013). Mental Workload: Its Theory and Measurement. Berlin:
Springer Science & Business Media, 8.
Parasuraman, R., and Rizzo, M. (2008). Neuroergonomics: The Brain at Work, 1
Edn. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Parasuraman, R., Sheridan, T. B., and Wickens, C. D. (2008). Situation awareness,
mental workload, and trust in automation: viable, empirically supported
cognitive engineering constructs. J. Cognit. Eng. Decis. Mak. 2, 140–160. doi:
10.1518/155534308X284417
Paxion, J., Galy, E., and Berthelon, C. (2014). Mental workload and driving. Front.
Psychol. 5:1344. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01344
Petridou, E., and Moustaki, M. (2000). Human factors in the causation of
road traﬃc crashes. Eur. J. Epidemiol. 16, 819–826. doi: 10.1023/A:1007649
804201
Philip, P., Sagaspe, P., Taillard, J., Valtat, C., Moore, N., Åkerstedt, T., et al.
(2005). Fatigue, sleepiness, and performance in simulated versus real driving
conditions. Sleep 28, 1511–1516. doi: 10.1093/sleep/28.12.1511
Prinzel, L. J., Freeman, F. G., Scerbo, M. W., Mikulka, P. J., and Pope, A. T.
(2000). A closed-loop system for examining psychophysiological measures
for adaptive task allocation. Int. J. Aviat. Psychol. 10, 393–410. doi: 10.1207/
S15327108IJAP1004_6
Reason, J. (2000). Human error: models and management. BMJ? Br. Med. J. 320,
768–770. doi: 10.1136/bmj.320.7237.768
Robert, J. H. G. (1997). Compensatory control in the regulation of human
performance
under
stress
and
high
workload:
a
cognitive-energetical
framework.
Biol.
Psychol.
45,
73–93.
doi:
10.1016/S0301-0511(96)
05223-4
Shankar, V., Mannering, F., and Barﬁeld, W. (1995). Eﬀect of roadway
geometrics
and
environmental
factors
on
rural
freeway
accident
frequencies. Accident Anal. Prevent. 27, 371–389. doi: 10.1016/0001-4575(94)
00078-Z
Siegel,
S.
(1956).
Nonparametric
Statistics
for
the
Behavioral
Sciences.
Nonparametric
Statistics
for
the
Behavioral
Sciences.
New
York,
NY:
McGraw-Hill.
Subramanian, R. (2012). Motor Vehicle Traﬃc Crashes as a Leading Cause Of
Death in the United States, 2008 and 2009. HS-811 620. Traﬃc Safety Facts –
Research Note. National Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration. Available at:
https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/ViewPublication/811620
Summala, H., and Mikkola, T. (1994). Fatal accidents among car and truck drivers:
eﬀects of fatigue, age, and alcohol consumption. Hum. Fact. 36, 315–326. doi:
10.1177/001872089403600211
Toppi, J., Borghini, G., Petti, M., He, E. J., De Giusti, V., He, B., et al. (2016).
Investigating cooperative behavior in ecological settings: an EEG hyperscanning
study. PLoS One 11:e0154236. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154236
Treat, J. R., Tumbas, N. S., McDonald, S. T., Shinar, D., and Hume, R. D. (1979).
Tri-level Study of the Caused of Traﬃc Accidents. Executive Summary. Available
at: https://trid.trb.org/view.aspx?id=144095
Vecchiato, G., Borghini, G., Aricò, P., Graziani, I., Maglione, A. G., Cherubino, P.,
et al. (2016). Investigation of the eﬀect of EEG-BCI on the simultaneous
execution of ﬂight simulation and attentional tasks. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput.
54, 1503–1513. doi: 10.1007/s11517-015-1420-6
Verwey, W. B. (2000). On-line driver workload estimation. Eﬀects of road situation
and age on secondary task measures. Ergonomics 43, 187–209. doi: 10.1080/
001401300184558
Vicente, K. J. (2013). The Human Factor: Revolutionizing the Way People Live
with Technology. Hoboken: Taylor and Francis. Available at: https://www.
taylorfrancis.com/books/9781135877262
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
17
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


Di Flumeri et al.
EEG Neurometric of Drivers’ Mental Workload
Wall, T. D., Michie, J., Patterson, M., Wood, S. J., Sheehan, M., Clegg,
C. W., et al. (2004). On the validity of subjective measures of company
performance.
Pers.
Psychol.
57,
95–118.
doi:
10.1111/j.1744-6570.2004.
tb02485.x
Wang, H., Zhang, C., Shi, T., Wang, F., and Ma, S. (2015). Real-time EEG-based
detection of fatigue driving danger for accident prediction. Int. J. Neural Syst.
25:1550002. doi: 10.1142/S0129065715500021
World Health, and Organization. (2015). Global Status Report on Road Safety 2015:
Supporting a Decade of Action. Geneva: WHO.
World Health Organization (2013). Global Status Report on Road Safety
2013: Supporting a Decade of Action. Available at: http://site.ebrary.com/id/
10931312
Xing, Y., Lv, C., Cao, D., Wang, H., and Zhao, Y. (2018). Driver workload
estimation using a novel hybrid method of error reduction ratio causality
and support vector machine. Measurement 114, 390–397. doi: 10.1016/j.
measurement.2017.10.002
Zhang, H., Chavarriaga, R., Khaliliardali, Z., Gheorghe, L., Iturrate, I., and Millán,
J. D. R. (2015). EEG-based decoding of error-related brain activity in a real-
world driving task. J. Neural Eng. 12:066028. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/12/6/
066028
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Di Flumeri, Borghini, Aricò, Sciaraﬀa, Lanzi, Pozzi, Vignali,
Lantieri, Bichicchi, Simone and Babiloni. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
18
December 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 509


