Semiotica 191–1/4 (2012), 117 – 135	
0037–1998/12/0191–0117
DOI 10.1515/sem-2012-0058	
© Walter de Gruyter
What it means to change lanes: 
Actions, emotions and wayfinding 
in the family car*
ERIC LAURIER, BARRY BROWN, and HAYDEN LORIMER
Abstract
In this paper we investigate how the sequential organization and settlement of 
disagreements comes to shape, and be shaped by, navigation. Using extracts of 
in-car interaction, we examine the gestalt of projectable aspects of road travel, 
car movements, and driver-navigator talk. Navigation when accomplished with-
out maps relies on making sense of streets, landmarks, and signs, activities that 
are displayed through passengers and drivers giving directions to each other, 
alongside embodied references to passing roadside features and the movement of 
the vehicle. More broadly, “finding the way” is bound up with the social relation-
ships between passengers — in particular families caring for one another and 
showing their epistemic and emotional stance on particular matters. To examine 
this we draw on existing conversation analytic work on epistemics, stance, and 
emotion to explore the potentially argumentative character of direction-giving 
and direction-receiving and how this comes to be combined with the task at hand.
Keywords:	 driving; conversation analysis; wayfinding; epistemics; emotion
1. Introduction
Families know their way around their world as families, their shared knowl-
edge of places and routes binding them together. Many of us will remember 
our experiences as children sitting in the backseat of the family car while our 
parents debated with rising passions the quickest way to get from one part of 
town to another. Perhaps many of us are now those parents — claiming to 
know a better way, making accusations, being criticized for the insufficiency of 
our directions, gritting our teeth as we make a U-turn in busy traffic, and other 
troubles that go with driving in the family car. In the research on navigation, 
however, these familiar situations in which navigation takes place have often 
been overlooked. Navigation, even where it is placed into a group setting 
(Hutchins 1993), continues to be treated as a problem of the intellect puzzling 
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


118  E. Laurier et al.
through charts and maps. It is perhaps the absence of groups like families in 
navigation research that explains a lack of attention to its emotional aspects.
In research based on models of mental spatial representations, the family’s 
familiarity with the layout of their neighborhood has usually been treated as 
two or more individuals consulting two or more cognitive maps instead of the 
knowing we have “as we go” (Ingold 2000: 239). As should already be clear 
from thinking about families in cars even for a moment, that we know where 
we are going as we go does not result in an absence of agreements and dis-
agreements, disputes, and resolutions. Instead we come upon how family 
members display their stance in relation to the route they are taking and their 
stance toward one another. In this article we will document and describe a fam-
ily’s wayfinding as a matter of standing and understandings. Each of which are 
then versed and reversed through the relationship between directional talk and 
ordinary features of the road system. We will examine how the way is found in 
the braiding of conversation’s sequential organization and the journey’s on-
ward orientations (Haddington 2010; Nevile 2004; Psathas 1991).
Ingold (2000) provides an invaluable start to rethinking wayfinding beyond 
the shadow cast by the concepts of mental maps and spatial cognition (e.g., 
Golledge 1999; MacEachren 2001; Roy 2005). In describing human move-
ment through a landscape Ingold makes a clear break from a long tradition of 
cognitive modelling, arguing that how we find our way through the familiar is 
quite unlike how we explore the unfamiliar. When a family goes down to their 
local supermarket they do not unfold the map, apply their compass and look for 
landmarks on the horizon. Nor do they scan the environment for indicators, 
consult their mental spatial representation, plot an optimizing A-B route and 
set off executing the plan. The family’s habitual navigation in the world is 
something quite different to planned map-based spatial navigation. Routes to 
the supermarket go unquestioned and overlooked, a family expects that it can 
get other things done on the way rather than having to work out the way. As the 
family drives to the supermarket they find themselves instead in traffic, weav-
ing between potholes, caught in a downpour, noticing a new cafe opening up, 
and all manner of other environmental possibilities.
When we are finding the way with others the relationships between those in 
the car reshapes how we navigate. In our earlier work on in-car interaction we 
studied drivers who car-pool and share their car rides to work, travelling the 
same route on a daily basis. We found that car-sharers formed a distinct inti-
mate relationship through being with each other every day — something that 
bears many resemblances to being members of a family with daily exposure to 
one another’s moods, stories, troubles, and successes (Laurier and Lorimer 
2012). In particular, car-poolers take any departure from their usual route as an 
“accountable matter.” The route that car-poolers took to work was agreed 
upon, carefully established through learning shortcuts, getting caught in slow 
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


What it means to change lanes  119
moving traffic, the character of particular roads as more or less dangerous or 
aggressive, and so on. Any change to that route would be justified or e­xplained. 
In our data the criteria used for route selection became visible when routes had 
to be changed because of roadworks or there was a requirement to pass by 
another place, and when a new route was suggested that route would be evalu-
ated in terms of the car-sharers’ standing toward one another as commuters.
Similarly, for families, most of the time the route goes uncommented upon, just 
as correct turns at junctions can be taken as correct by an absence of response. It 
is when difficulties with a route arise that the unsaid becomes said (Haddington 
2010) and it is an instance of one such difficulty that we examine here.
2. Approaching semiosis
Our connection to more traditional semiotic concerns is through an ethnomethod-
ological and conversation analytic turn toward social semiosis and away from 
more formalist semiotics (McHoul 1996). In such an approach analysts no longer 
establish and interpret the relationship between sign and object, i­nstead, they in-
vestigate the logics of signification as they are realized through practical activities 
— such as the assignment of color in a chemistry lab (Goodwin 1997). Two par-
ticularly pertinent earlier articles, which draw on wayfinding examples, show how 
the reading of signs is embedded in and only intelligible through an understanding 
of the sequence of activities in which it occurs, whether it is simply “getting there” 
(Sharrock and Anderson 1979) or “being seen to read the signs” as part of identi-
fying what sort of legitimate person one is within a space (McHoul 1984).
Within conversation analysis (CA), Schegloff (1972) carried out a signifi-
cant study of the uses of place terms. In that early work he provided a sketch of 
the relationship between formulating place and navigation that was taken up 
later by others in the field. Psathas and Henlin’s ethnographies of cab d­rivers 
preceded Schegloff’s study and is intriguing as a proto-CA ethno-­inquiry into 
“locating activities” using the case of the dispatch order (Psathas and Henslin 
1967). Psathas’s later work (1986, 1991) differentiated between “how to get 
to” and “where are you” sequences, the former generally producing complex 
steps to be followed and the latter often being dealt with through one place 
formulation. Wayfinding draws not only on the linguistic resources highlighted 
by Psathas, but also the multimodal communicative resources of gesture, arte-
facts, and spatial arrangement (Goodwin 1986; and see also Norris 2004). 
Havilland, by defamiliarizing conventions of directional gestures through an-
thropological work in the languages of Zinacantan (Haviland 2005), Tzotzil 
(Haviland 2000), and Guugu Yimidhirr (Haviland 1998) revealed background 
assumptions underlying left and right in both speech and gesture.
More recently, these CA studies have been supplemented by a number of 
authors with an interest in gesture, body orientation, and environmental features 
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


120  E. Laurier et al.
in situations where participants are mobile. Through examining situations where 
unacquainted pedestrians seek directions, Mondada (2009) brought out the pre-
liminary work that is required to establish a shared orientation relative to the 
surrounding city (see also Laurier and Brown 2008). It is only once gaze and 
bodily indexicals, such as left and right, are aligned that direction-sequences can 
be initiated. Closely related to the analysis that we will present, Haddington and 
Keisanen (2009) show how features of car journeys occasion route negotiations 
and provide temporal boundaries that require negotiation to be undertaken. Fol-
lowing Haddington (2010), we aim to describe direction-giving and wayfinding 
as forms of social semiosis in the midst of a mobile road environment. To this 
we add an examination of the affective qualities of wayfinding. Even in o­ffering 
directions or choosing a route it is an area ripe with possibilities for disagree-
ment and blame, and in our earlier work we have attended to the preparatory 
work oriented around sharing responsibility for route selections (Brown and 
Laurier 2005; Laurier and Brown 2008). What we will tease apart later in the 
article is what happens when wayfinding goes wrong. What is also of i­nterest in 
examining such a moment is whether there are qualities that occur that are par-
ticular to the family rather than commuters or friends. Moreover when the rela-
tionship-generated categories of family members meet those vehicle-generated 
categories of driver and passenger there is further i­nterest in how entitlements 
and responsibilities shift and move between them on a moment-by-moment ba-
sis. From Goodwin’s work on family disputes it becomes also clear that shifts in 
what he calls participation frameworks also restructure affect (Goodwin 2007).
The episode we will present comes from a three year project “Habitable 
Cars: the collective organization of private travel” (Laurier et al. 2007). During 
the project we collected over one hundred hours of video recordings of jour-
neys made by different social groups in cars. The groups were a contrasting 
mix of car-poolers, families, and friends. We used a follow-and-film approach: 
the project ethnographer would spend a week travelling with each car learning 
about its occupants’ routes, elements of the history of each group of travellers 
and asking various other questions inspired by the particularities of each jour-
ney. At the end of the week a pair of camcorders were handed over to the trav-
ellers and they were asked to record half a dozen of their typical journeys over 
the next week. Many of the groups recorded a great deal more than six jour-
neys, retaining the camcorders for up to a month. For a fortnight or more, after 
the DV tapes were returned, the project ethnographer then sifted through the 
footage provided by the project participants selecting up to sixty clips per 
v­ehicle for further detailed analysis. These clips were returned to the partici-
pants on DVD to secure their informed consent for re-use in data sessions, 
conference papers, and academic publications.
From the corpus of these clips assembled by the project a number were 
s­elected for transcription according to conversation analysis conventions 
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


What it means to change lanes  121
(J­efferson 1984) and more detailed analysis during data sessions (Heath 1997). 
The latter allow for the repeated viewing of fragments of various human prac-
tices in order to begin to describe the witnessable social orders to be found there 
(Lynch and Bogen 1996). Where some practitioners of conversation a­nalysis 
emphasize gathering together large collections of instances to look for recur-
rent features of talking together (Have 1999), our approach has been to dwell 
on only a handful of data fragments. Indeed, in this the interests of brevity in 
this paper we focus on just one extract. The demands of presenting audio-vi-
sual materials in sufficient detail for analysis that tracks talk, g­estures, objects, 
and environment require more space, so the same solution works here of track-
ing one episode rather than gathering a collection of comparative instances. 
However, as we hope the reader will discover it is a particularly rich fragment.
3. Failures in family wayfinding
The family that we will join here are at a classic occasion for a family argu-
ment. They have taken a detour around the center of London to avoid the Con-
gestion Charging Zone. At the outset, Jess, the mother, confidently claimed 
knowledge of a “right turn” that would allow them to travel a route between 
two hospitals avoiding the “Zone.” The journey between two hospitals is being 
made in o­rder to track down the belongings of a chronically-ill grandmother. 
The reason and responsibility for the journey thus connects in a particular fash-
ion to each occupant of the car through a familial logic — in particular morally 
locating Jess because the grandmother is her mother. Part of the background to 
what is happening is also that Jess has, by dint of living closest to the hospitals, 
b­ecome the primary carer for her seriously ill mother. Most of the visits to 
grandmother in the old and new hospitals were done using the family car.
From the outset of this journey, a key question for Jess and Steve (the father) 
was the existence of “the right turn” that could be made to connect to the h­ospital. 
Steve although having expressed skepticism over the existence of this right turn, 
has nevertheless continued driving the family along the route. After a lengthy 
discussion earlier, Jess has an increased stake in finding “the right” that she had 
been so certain about. One of the questions that travelling together in the car as a 
family produces is the potential categories in play — in this case father/driver/
route-follower and mother/passenger/navigator. These categories are not defini-
tively decided, rather they are potential categories made relevant in talk, though 
here we will not be focusing on settling which of those are in play.
The family, having successfully skirted the congestion charging zone, arrive 
at the road in question, at which point, of course, they will discover whether 
they can turn right or not. Jess in the front passenger seat, says be careful and, 
almost as she says this, the car drives past a right turn. Jess rejects that turn 
as being the correct right and they continue up the road. As they progress it 
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


122  E. Laurier et al.
becomes less and less likely there is another right turn that they can take. Hav-
ing been certain of her route Jess faces the impossibility of making such a right 
turn. At the top end of the street there is a barrier in the middle of the road that 
prevents any possibility of a right turn. Jess who has been looking less and less 
confident gets upset. For Steve, his early doubt about a right turn has seem-
ingly been vindicated and this now leads to a situation ripe for blame, score-
settling and more. The route was not one they had both known and been confi-
dent about, it was Jess’ route — in turn Jess holds the responsibility of having 
taken them on a route that she either misremembered or which had always been 
impossible. A simplistic reading from the outside would be to see Steve vindi-
cated and Jess shown wrong. Events point otherwise, when Jess’ claim col-
lapses and she becomes upset, Steve steers both her — and the car — out of 
trouble. In doing so we begin to catch elements of how the family exists in its 
intimacy, its long histories of faults and forgiveness and its caring for and of its 
members. From the transcripts what we can pursue more closely is how, in this 
specific case, a number of complex actions, emotions and emergent features of 
wayfinding are related to one another.
Let us start with tracking the course of Steve’s sensitivity around the pro-
jected “way-failure” back to the beginning of their search for the right turn (the 
location of the video grab is marked with a “[*]” [in red] in the transcripts that 
follow and overlap with “+”):
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


What it means to change lanes  123
Jess reins in their attention to this immediate section of road, be careful, (line 
1) the road thus becoming a territory of concern. Almost immediately Steve 
points out a right turn (emerging in line 11 and completed in 16). There are 
several points to note about this. First, that we have divergent perspectives on 
the road. Jess is scanning the distant road ahead, while Steve immediately 
b­egins glancing over to the right hand side of the road. Where one might want 
to say that this is a feature of the car’s architecture because the driver is looking 
out of his side of the front window and then the side window itself, what is 
possibly more important here is that Jess knows where her right turn is and is 
already looking toward that area. Steve, meantime, is taking the instructions at 
their word and identifying candidate right turns. Second, the tense used to refer 
to the opening: not “isn’t” but wasn’t (line 16). The change of tense comes not 
even with having passed the exit — it is still on the right. Yet it is done with an 
acute sense of the braking and indicating distance required to take the right in 
question. The exit is seen as an object whose status is generated by its relation-
ship to their driving. It is not just “a road” that is being talked about here, but 
“an exit,” that the car could be maneuvered onto. Third, Jess’ a little bit further 
up (line 9), which would have aligned Steve with the correct zone ahead to be 
examining, was too late. Steve was already moving to point out the turning to 
the right that they are approaching using his gearstick hand. This is the hand 
that will most likely catch the attention of the passenger, his other being too 
peripheral. Jess turns her head a little toward that side, and by the visibility of 
her attending to his side of the car, Steve can now comment on the environ-
mental feature and its surrounds:
(2)
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


124  E. Laurier et al.
Jess then leans forward and across Steve, craning her neck to look deeper into 
the right hand turn as they pass it. In leaning in she creates something close to 
a “body torque” (Schegloff 1998) that will eventually have to be released. 
Aside from positioning herself in this recognizably temporary state, it is done 
so that she can peer into Steve’s candidate road exit. Along with what category 
of looking is being produced (e.g., peering versus glancing), it is the sequenc-
ing of the peering that interests us here. Jess’ body torque uncoils (line 24) as 
she moves back into her standard seating position as a passenger. In her uncoil-
ing, Jess, while still leaning forward though no longer across Steve, does a 
second peer at the road ahead. This second look right after the first is visibly 
surveying the road ahead in comparison to the now passed right turn. All the 
more so given that Jess while doing so is holding off a conclusion by using the 
questioning-continuer ehm and only on completing the survey of the road 
ahead does she say no don’t think so (lines 24 –25). Her peerings gather in the 
perspectives required to be able to say it is not. Here, already, her epistemic 
claims have weakened from a definite a little bit further up (line 9) to don’t 
think so (lines 24 –25).
The nature of car travel in urban road traffic means that we are constantly 
pushed on and cannot pause nor retrace our steps easily in the way that we can 
on the pavement. The family is kept moving along the road and cannot return 
to this first right hand turn to reconsider. The onwardness of traffic also means 
that even as Jess is rejecting the first right as not the one that she remembers, 
the forward movement of the traffic brings them to another street going the 
wrong way (see also Haddington and Keisanen 2009). How Steve deals with 
Jess’ weakened rejection of the turn is by providing a directional formulation 
— that’s right hand turn (line 27), which provides a match with Jess’ route as 
provided during her earlier directions.
Dunno how far down I came out (line 29) is placed at a moment when 
the traffic is slow and they have the opportunity to look around without mov-
ing any further. Yet the road has not brought them fresh perspectives on the 
situation. This surveying is again linked to Jess being able to say not this far 
down (line 30). Ingold argues for the importance of the structuring of per­
spectives in wayfinding and here, perhaps, we have the persistent absence of 
a remembered perspective which would then link into the sequence of per­
spectives that Jess is able to recall. It is a property of memory that it can be 
tied  to reaching a location which delivers a perspective that matches what 
the  person can recall. Prospectively we can say “I will recognize it when 
I’m there” or we find ourselves walking around an area for a while before sud-
denly we say “there it is!” I­nstead Jess and Steve edge a little further up the 
road and have come upon two visible features of the road-scape — a no-entry 
and a long set of railings down the middle of the road which prevent turning 
right.
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


What it means to change lanes  125
(3)
It is here where Jess’ certainty unravels further. Having looked around and not 
been able to offer any noticings about where they are, she now switches from 
an uncertain rejection to a reconsideration of that exit as possibly having been 
the one she took.
The car here provides for the sort of side-by-side alignment noted by Mon-
dada (2009) as key in undertaking direction-giving. Yet at the same time certain 
views are relatively restricted or/and obstructed because of traffic’s visual prop-
erties, the car’s fixed seating and the passenger and driver themselves blocking 
one another’s views. In the above transcript, Jess is craning her neck (line 38) in 
order to gain the perspective of the driver. The camera’s view in the video still 
is roughly the view of the passenger relaxed in their seat. Stretching up allows 
Jess to see along the fence a little farther, and to draw conclusions about which 
“right” is which. Her next turn-beginning although (line 39) thus gains its sense 
from following after her inspection (line 38), which has provided fresh evidence 
of the impossibility of the right turn, even if not of a feature or landmark that she 
can recollect. Just by itself, a second visual inquiry of the surroundings provides 
the warrant for a revised statement to be made. Added to this in the moving car 
there can be greater or lesser visual access to the buildings, trees, and streets 
surrounding the road we are on as we travel further along it.
What follows Jess’ second thoughts is an agitated biting of her fingers (line 
41). She also looks in alignment with Steve (line 42) at the street exit the car is 
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


126  E. Laurier et al.
currently sitting beside, this is a street they cannot enter either due to the fence, 
so their gaze is settled upon an impossible right turn rather than continuing to 
search for other options. Steve’s response (lines 44 – 45) is intonationally soft-
ened although this time matched with Jess’ and thus coming to an agreement 
about having missed their right turn.
What happens next is closely related to the opening up of the view down the 
middle of the road as the car drives another hundred meters or so forward. It has 
been travelling beside the railings that continue to extend into a vanishing point.
(4)
In extract 4, the car has moved alongside the central railings that preclude right 
turns. Steve has given them one look before saying I’m pretty sure (line 52). The 
sense of marking out how much anyone can see and thus what their epistemic 
claims are is reminiscent, if in a scaled-down sense of, classic studies of visual 
a­ccess and knowledge claims in airport organization (Goodwin and Goodwin 
1996). In those studies, where there is a spread-out ground-crew with differential 
visual access to what was happening across the landing strips, gates, and apron, 
there was an ongoing need to mark out what each can plainly see, and what can be 
inferred, what is based on someone else’s view, and so on. In the above extract, 
Steve shifts from claiming some degree of certainty about the absence of a right 
exit to certainty (lines 62– 63). Similar to the inspections being done earlier, the car 
has moved forward another hundred meters and he can finally see the traffic lights 
at the end of the fenced road section that have a no-right-turn sign at their base.
Between those shifts in his claims to certainty Jess continues to be anxious 
and provide no amended proposals as to where the right could be, or instruc-
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


What it means to change lanes  127
tions, or anything else. Again Steve’s we’ve got a problem now (line 57) 
­handles the absence of the right hand turn, not as assigning blame to Jess, but 
rather uses we to gather them together and perhaps shift himself into place as 
a potential agent of an upcoming solution. His phrasing of who the problem 
belongs to as we not “you,” is of course not beyond Jess making further 
­inferences — yet it does still remain a problem that was generated by her 
­wayfinding. However we suggest here that it is Steve as driver who is pursuing 
a response from Jess as navigator. After re-iterating — I’m pretty sure you 
can’t throw a right up here (lines 52–53) — though now with an increase in 
certainty over the absence of the right turn Steve only gets a note of dismay 
from Jess. His upshot is formulated in such a way that he still does not say what 
should be done, or indeed appropriate blame for the “problem.” Jess could still 
offer a solution, however she provides instead a further marker of her distress 
by only making a muted tisk (line 60).
In his last turn in Excerpt 4, Steve’s self-confirmation — yeah no right turn 
(lines 62– 63) — warrants a departure from the driver-navigator pairing of Jess 
and Steve. The lane change is a significant action for a number of reasons 
b­ecause, first it stops them being boxed into the right hand lane, second, it ends 
the search for the right hand turn and, third, it is initiating a new driving course 
of action that has yet to be established. The delivery of the self-confirmation is 
economical, thus it also expresses the rapid response needed to change lanes in 
the approach to a box junction at traffic lights. If we imagine some alternative 
expressions here: we can’t throw a right or I can’t bloody throw a right, each 
of these continue the previous fruitless search and tend toward a complaint and 
potentially an argument. What we do see here instead is how his close-packed 
turn at talk, which is also tightly coupled with indicating and beginning to 
maneuver the car (see comparable moves in Haddington 2010), is directed to-
ward a new course of action.
In a situation we are all surely familiar with, facing the mundane reality of 
the road system (Pollner 1987), Jess restates that what now appears not to be 
possible was once done.
(5)
Preceded by her nail-biting and in the face of the absence of the once certain 
right turn, Jess now expresses distress and puzzlement in its emphatic tone — 
but we did (line 66) — as Steve shifts lanes. Her claim fails, once again, to 
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


128  E. Laurier et al.
provide new directions to the driver, attending instead to the undercurrent of 
inferred error or, indeed, blame. Of pertinence to what will happen in a m­oment 
she remains oriented to the road ahead, searching for that “right” even if it is 
now a last-chance look. Her claim also shifts to its remaining ground, that is no 
longer of an epistemic nature and is now trimmed down to an accomplishment. 
Steve’s work is cut-out here because he has to both change lanes and then 
a­ttend to Jess’ distress. Under other less time-pressed circumstances perhaps 
he might have been able to supply scenarios through which Jess could have 
made a right hand turn, as she continues to claim, and thus avoid a family argu-
ment. Indeed, Steve shifts to the present tense preface, which is one that con-
trasts with Jess’ past tense and also marks a direct conflict here. As Steve says 
— You can’t (line 68) — Jess responds with a crestfallen expression, which, 
while visible from the camera’s perspective, is quite lost on the driver:
The crestfallen look prefigures what will come. Meantime, Steve reiterates his 
account for the lane-changing actions by dint of which a right does not exist 
there’s no right turn. An account that is about to provide an upshot in terms of 
what he will do next when:
(6)
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


What it means to change lanes  129
In the upshot, the shift in agency, already of course established by the lane-
change, is marked with an I (line 69). However, before Steve can add what his 
next course of action will be, Jess does an overlapped cut-off (line 71) and 
seemingly instead gives up the whole mission with: OH JUST GO home, go 
home. Although she appears, from a literal interpretation, to be giving up, she 
does this in a contextually-sensitive fashion by belatedly providing directions 
(home) to the driver. These directives are, then, the response that his previous 
reports on the absence of their next step in the journey had been expecting. 
There is something more subtle and complex happening here though. If we 
examine the video-still below: as her turn begins Jess looks-away from the 
road, shifting her whole head toward the passenger side while raising and wav-
ing her hand in frustration. If we recall her earlier leaning and craning, these 
were body postures arising in and out of the requirement of navigating. Her 
shift in bodily orientation then is a significant shift in her stance toward the 
wayfinding itself as a task (similar to Goodwin 2007). In as much as one can 
within a car, she is backing-off from it. Where in the midst of cooking in the 
kitchen one might raise one’s hands and walk away from the cooker shouting 
oh just phone the pizza delivery company! here her gestures are tailored toward 
what can be done within the car-space and what can be seen by the driver. The 
hand that expresses this frustration is the one that is in the middle of the car 
and thus the one that is visible to the driver ( Nevile 2007). If we look at the 
video-still again we can see her other arm remains un-moved on the passenger 
window-frame.
(7)
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


130  E. Laurier et al.
Expressive in their pitch of Jess’ despair at having lead the family up a blind 
alley, the formulation of place — home — is one that re-ignites “family” as the 
group struggling to find a way through the city. Home is a place formulation 
identifiable to, and by them, as family members (Schegloff 1972). Using home 
collects them all as a family even as it also marks its opposition onward and is 
the place where the mum, as distressed family member, would want to retreat 
to. The spontaneity of this emotional occurrence is evident in the timing of its 
interruption of Steve’s proposal before he has finished. By following the 
p­receding course of action we can see how this upset does not come out of 
nowhere. Although this is apprehensibly how she feels at this moment, it is a 
feeling that comes after a stepwise progression first from confidence as she 
began with be careful, (line 1) then to nail-biting agitation and finally nail-
biting withdrawal. Throughout Steve has been displaying his orientation to her 
changed emotional displays and tailoring his epistemic claims toward a non-
confrontational stance.
Given that it is publicly available that an upset is in the offing, it should be 
no surprise to us that Steve does not take Jess’ directive literally and head 
home. Along with being pre-figured, her distressed instructions, when they do 
arrive, are an “extreme case formulation” of what to do next. In other words, 
she is not providing anything that could be taken as a reasonable next step in 
reaching the hospital, all the more so because within the journey itself as unit, 
they have almost completed it. After driving for several miles around the center 
of London, their final destination, the hospital, is only a block away. Here the 
extreme case formulation is being used in an unusual fashion against its issuer. 
One of Pomerantz’s (1986: 219) identified uses of extreme case formulations 
is to “counter challenges to the legitimacy of complaints, accusations, justifica-
tions, and defenses.” While Jess is succeeding in countering the lane-change as 
a potential accusation she uses it against herself (and to some extent the father 
and daughter) in its outcome. Were they to go home Jess would be the one who 
stands to lose most by this action since it is her trip. Her directive is thus also 
analyzable in terms of how it affects those in the car differently. Clearly for the 
husband and daughter there is only a limited loss because it is not really their 
trip that is being given up. It is Jess as the primary carer for the grandmother 
who would suffer were her directive to be acted upon by Steve. We can imag-
ine the atmosphere on the journey home should he have taken her at her word.
What Steve does is to mark a repair with no no (line 75 above). This is a 
repair that then attends to Jess having taken his lane-change as abandoning her 
directions, giving up on her as a navigator and, of course, an accusation that 
she had been wrong all along. Once he has the floor: I’ll go left and back round 
(2.0) Yeah. Coz then you’ll have lights in your favor won’t ya (line 77 in the 
transcript excerpt 6). Steve is able to repair the sense of the lane change from a 
criticism of Jess’ directions to being about doing a road maneuver that allows 
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


What it means to change lanes  131
them to take the right after all. There is a marvelous adjustment in what then 
follows to a more explicit support and encouragement of Jess in the switch 
from I to you in saying the traffic lights will be in your favor (line 80 below). 
It is striking because it combines helping Jess to see the good side of having to 
do an extra maneuver with simultaneously handing agency for the journey 
back to Jess by switching from I to you. Should Jess come back at this point 
Steve will return to being merely the driver again, following directions. Be-
cause the car is at rest he is also able to turn to Jess to pursue a response:
(8)
Jess shows her understanding of having been made responsible for the journey 
again by restating why she has asked them to make this trip in the first place 
and indeed placing that responsibility outside of her direct desires by waving 
the envelope. The envelope that contains the list of items lost between the hos-
pitals and that has indeed been the reason for the journey.
As we leave the family sitting at the traffic lights in London let us remind 
ourselves of the short journey we have taken with them. We have revisited how 
we read signs, treating looking at them as an action that is thoroughly inter­
woven with the unfolding of sequences of other actions. A sign is looked for 
by the driver, at a certain point it is found and at that point it provides a basis 
for his next move. More centrally to the issues here we have seen how route 
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


132  E. Laurier et al.
epistemics shift from certainty to uncertainty to a bare recall of actions accom-
plished ( but we did ) in the ongoing inspection of the road environment. This 
gives us the grounds to understand aspects of the particularities of the car as a 
device for seeing from and being propelled by. In its movement it generates 
projectable sequences of the environment ahead and behind. If we compare it 
to how we can move through a city as pedestrians or as a passenger on a bus 
these are quite distinct. Indeed the most dramatic contract would be with the 
orienteer in an open landscape with not even a path to follow. Finally we have 
here a small yet rich instance of the accountability of a driver’s actions when 
collaborating with a passenger who is also a family member.
4. Conclusion
To return to our opening arguments around the nature of navigating the famil-
iar by those who are also familiar to each other, we can begin to see that Ingold 
(2000), while providing a valuable critique of cognitive psychology, perhaps 
starts to miss the human relationships lived out in wayfinding. Moreover that 
there may also still be navigational puzzles that remain even in familiar terri-
tories. What we have been reminded of in the episode, and which is central to 
this article, is that wayfinding often fails although in a manner that is not cata-
clysmic. We think we know how to get from the supermarket to the train sta-
tion but find ourselves stuck in a dead end. We are happily driving along a 
country road toward our favorite picnic site when we realize we have driven 
past it. We take the usual route to work forgetting that it is closed because of 
roadworks. Even when we are alone we may start cursing ourselves or shout-
ing aloud about the absurdity of the road system. With our loved ones, as we 
noted when we began, this can easily descend into angry recriminations, but 
often will not.
In an article on family arguments Goodwin (2006) shows to useful ends for 
those who continue to assume the omnirelevance of the car as a space for inter-
action within it how the fact that people are in a car on a journey has limited 
relevance to the matter at hand:
For parties involved in the dispute, faced with the task of building, sustaining, and argu-
ing for their positions, while countering the proposals of others, the detailed structure of 
the talk in progress is a far more relevant and consequential environment for action than 
the SUV they are sitting in, the freeway, and the landscape that is passing by. (Goodwin 
2006: 449)
In the larger project out of which this article arises (Laurier et al. 2007) there 
are numerous incidences where this is indeed the case. In fact, the time spent 
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


What it means to change lanes  133
in conversations that arise out of, and are related to, driving and the journey is 
greatly outweighed by other matters. However these situations still do occur 
regularly enough and are of great consequence because so much of the r­esearch 
on way-finding on foot or in the car appears to excise it from the social units 
and activities in which it is embedded. In contrast to Goodwin’s analysis the 
journey here is relevant to and provides a resource for the task of building, 
sustaining, and arguing for positions. As we have seen, the movement of the 
car itself plays a key role in the argumentative and discursive moves underway.
What we have also opened up in the article is the place of affect in wayfind-
ing, which is again perhaps surprisingly overlooked given the likely emotional 
contours of getting lost and the disputatious possibilities of direction-seeking 
and direction-giving. Jack Katz (1999) in his sociological study of the emo-
tions opened up in the moments of rage between drivers and other drivers on 
the road, laying out the affective qualities of actions such as tailgating and how 
they lead to outbursts on the roads of Los Angeles. Here we take that emotional 
life of driving inside the car. As Katz noted, although emotions rise up and 
overwhelm us with their violence, there is a logic to their occurrence. What we 
have sought to do here is show how the known-in-common grammars of the 
emergence, rise, and fall of distress helps the parties involved in the situation 
both try to head them-off or calm them down. If and when someone does get 
upset over the trouble during wayfinding, their degree of dismay can also be 
considered as reasonable or not in terms of the circumstances of their arousal.
If we consider emotion as situated then we are taking the reverse perspective 
on Austin’s felicitous conditions. For Austin, these were the many conditions 
that had to be in place before a speech act such as “I bet” could be felicitous in 
accomplishing its action. Here our play is instead upon whether there are con-
ditions in place that justify felicity or infelicity. However, as Cavell (2005) 
points out there is no necessary link between conditions and feelings as there 
was with conditions and speech acts. When we are in the realm of the passions, 
any conditions for success of an emotional act, such as “I must declare myself 
(explicitly or implicitly) to have standing with you ( be appropriate) in the 
given case” (Cavell 2005: 181) can be denied, questioned, dismissed or post-
poned. That this does not happen in the situation we have looked at is because 
the mother and father affirm their standing with one another. It is in its own 
small way, and if only for a short while, a happy ending.
Note
*  We acknowledge the UK Economic Social Research Council, our project participants in “Hab-
itable Cars,” an invaluable data session with LINT in Gothenberg 2010, and Pentti Hadding-
ton, Maurice Nevile, and Tiina Keisanen for helping us get back inside the car again.
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


134  E. Laurier et al.
References
Brown, Barry & Eric Laurier. 2005. Maps and Journeys: An ethnomethodological investigation. 
Cartographica 4. 17–33.
Cavell, Stanley. 2005. Philosophy the day after tomorrow. Harvard: Harvard University Press.
Golledge, Reginald G. (ed.). 1999. Wayfinding behavior, cognitive mapping, and other spatial 
processes. London: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Goodwin, Charles. 1986. Gesture as a resource for the organization of mutual orientation. Semi-
otica 62 (1/2). 29– 49.
Goodwin, Charles. 1997. The blackness of black: Color categories as situated practice. In Lauren 
B. Resnick, Roger Säljö, Clotilde Pontecorvo & Barbara Burge (eds.), Discourse, tools, and 
reasoning: Essays on situated cognition, 111–140. New York: Springer.
Goodwin, Charles. 2006. Retrospective and prospective orientation in the construction of argu-
mentative moves. Text 26. 443– 461.
Goodwin, Charles. 2007. Participation, stance, and affect in the organization of activities. Dis-
course & Society 18. 53–73.
Goodwin, Charles & Marjorie Harness Goodwin. 1996. Seeing as situated activity: Formulating 
planes. In Y. Engeström & D. Middleton (eds.), Cognition and communication at work, 61–95. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Haddington, Pentti. 2010. Turn-taking for turntaking: Mobility, time, and action in sequential 
o­rganization of junction-negotiation in cars. Research on Language and Social Interaction 
43(4). 372– 400.
Haddington, Pentti & Tiina Keisanen. 2009. Location, mobility and the body as resources in 
s­electing a route. Journal of Pragmatics 41. 1938–1961.
Have, Paul Ten. 1999. Doing conversation analysis: A practical guide. London: Sage.
Haviland, John B. 1998. Guugu Yimithirr cardinal directions. Ethos 26. 25– 47.
Haviland, John B. 2000. Pointing, gesture spaces, and mental maps. In David McNeill (ed.), Lan-
guage and gesture, 13– 46. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
Haviland, John B. 2005. Directional precision in Zinacantec gestures: Preconditions of talk about 
space. Intellectica 41. 25–54.
Heath, Christian. 1997. The analysis of activities in face to face interaction using video. In David 
Silverman (ed.), Qualitative research: Theory, method, and practice, 183–200. London: Sage.
Hutchins, Edwin. 1993. Learning to navigate. In S. Chaiklin & J. Lave (eds.), Understanding 
Practice: Perspectives on activity and context, 35– 63. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ingold, Tim. 2000. The perception of the environment: Essays in livelihood, dwelling, and skill. 
London: Routledge.
Jefferson, Gail. 1984. Transcript notation. In J. M. Atkinson & J. Heritage (eds.), Structures of 
social action: studies in conversation analysis, ix–xvi. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Katz, Jack. 1999. How emotions work. London: University of Chicago Press.
Laurier, Eric & Barry Brown. 2008. Rotating maps and readers: Praxiological aspects of alignment 
and orientation. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 33. 201–221.
Laurier, Eric & Hayden Lorimer. 2012. Other ways: Landscapes of commuting. Landscape Studies 
37. 207–223.
Laurier, Eric, Hayden Lorimer & Barry Brown. 2007. Habitable cars: The organization of collec-
tive private travel, final report to the ESRC. Edinburgh & Swindon: ESRC.
Lynch, Michael & David Bogen. 1996. The spectacle of history: Speech, text, and memory at the 
Iran-contra hearings. London: Duke University Press.
MacEachren, Alan M. 2001. An evolving cognitive-semiotic approach to geographic visualization 
and knowledge construction. Information Design Journal 10. 26 –36.
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


What it means to change lanes  135
McHoul, Alec. 1984. Being seen to read the signs: Some extension of the work of Sharrock and 
Anderson. Information Design Journal 4. 69–76.
McHoul, Alec. 1996. Semiotic investigations: Towards an effective semiotics. London: University 
of Nebraska Press.
Mondada, Lorenza. 2009. Emergent focused interactions in public places: A systematic analysis of the 
multimodal achievement of a common interactional space. Journal of Pragmatics 41. 1977–1997.
Nevile, Maurice. 2004. Beyond the black box: Talk-in interaction in the airline cockpit. Aldershot: 
Ashgate.
Nevile, Maurice. 2007. Seeing the point: Attention and participation in the airline cockpit. In 
Lorenza Mondada & V. Markaki (eds.), Interacting bodies: Online proceedings of the second 
international conference of the international society for gesture studies. Lyon: ENS LSH & 
ICAR Research Lab. http://gesture-lyon2005.ens-lsh.fr/article.php3?id_article=245 (accessed 
14 April 2012).
Norris, Sigrid. 2004. Analyzing multimodal interaction: A methodological framework. London: 
Routledge.
Pollner, Melvin. 1987. Mundane reason. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pomerantz, Anita. 1986. Extreme case formulations: A way of legitimizing claims. Human Studies 
9. 219–29.
Psathas, George. 1986. Some sequential structures in direction-giving. Human Studies 9. 231–246.
Psathas, George. 1991. Direction-giving in Interaction. In Deirdre Boden & Don H. Zimmerman 
(eds.), Talk and social structure: Studies in ethnomethodology and conversation analysis, 195–
216. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Psathas, George & James M. Henslin. 1967. Dispatched orders and the cab driver: A study of locat-
ing activities. Social Problems 14. 424 – 443.
Roy, Deb. 2005. Semiotic schemas: A framework for grounding language in action and perception. 
Artificial Intelligence 167. 170 –205.
Schegloff, Emanuel A. 1972. Notes on a conversational practice: Formulating place. In David 
Sudnow (ed.), Studies in Social Interaction, 75–119, 432– 433. Glencoe: Free Press.
Schegloff, Emanuel A. 1998. Body torque. Social Research 65(3). 535–595.
Sharrock, Wesley W. & Digby C. Anderson. 1979. Directional hospital signs as sociological data. 
Information Design Journal 1. 81–94.
Eric Laurier ( b. 1968) is a senior lecturer in geography and interaction at University of Edinburgh 
〈eric.laurier@ed.ac.uk〉. His research interests include visual aspects of interaction, public space, 
mobility, and technology. His publications include “The spectacular showing: Houdini and the 
wonder of ethnomethodology” (2004); “Putting the dog back in the park: animal and human mind-
in-action” (with R. Maze & J. London, 2006); and “Rotating maps and readers: praxiological 
­aspects of alignment and orientation” (with B. Brown, 2008).
Barry Brown ( b. 1972) is an associate professor at Mobile Life 〈barry@mobilelifecentre.org〉. His 
research interests include technology, ethnomethodology, interaction, and human computer inter-
action. His publications include “Place as a practical concern of mobile workers” (with K. O’Hara, 
2003); “Unpacking the television: studies of a changing technology” (with L. Barkhuus, 2009); 
and “Experts at play: Understanding skilled expertise” (with S. Reeves & E. Laurier, 2009).
Hayden Lorimer ( b. 1971) is a senior lecturer at the University of Glasgow 〈hlorimer@ges.gla.
ac.uk〉. His research interests include landscape, mobility, humans, and animals. His publications 
include “Herding memories of humans and animals” (2006); and “Forces of nature, forms of life: 
calibrating ethology and phenomenology” (2010).
Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


Brought to you by | George Mason University
Authenticated | 129.174.21.5
Download Date | 4/23/13 5:42 PM


