Suppression of overt attentional capture by salient-but-irrelevant
color singletons
Nicholas Gaspelin1 & Carly J. Leonard1 & Steven J. Luck1
# The Psychonomic Society, Inc. 2016
Abstract For more than 2 decades, researchers have debated
the nature of cognitive control in the guidance of visual atten-
tion. Stimulus-driven theories claim that salient stimuli auto-
matically capture attention, whereas goal-driven theories pro-
pose that an individual’s attentional control settings determine
whether salient stimuli capture attention. In the current study,
we tested a hybrid account called the signal suppression hy-
pothesis, which claims that all stimuli automatically generate a
salience signal but that this signal can be actively suppressed
by top-down attentional mechanisms. Previous behavioral and
electrophysiological research has shown that participants can
suppress covert shifts of attention to salient-but-irrelevant col-
or singletons. In this study, we used eye-tracking methods to
determine whether participants can also suppress overt shifts
of attention to irrelevant singletons. We found that under con-
ditions that promote active suppression of the irrelevant sin-
gletons, overt attention was less likely to be directed toward
the salient distractors than toward nonsalient distractors. This
result provides direct evidence that people can suppress
salient-but-irrelevant singletons below baseline levels.
Keywords Attentionalcapture .Visualsearch .Suppression .
Eye movements
We often assume that feature singletons, such as uniquely
colored objects (called color singletons), can serve as power-
ful attractors of attention in daily life. For example, light-
houses are frequently painted unnatural colors (e.g., red and
white stripes) and equipped with flashing beacons to warn
sailors of shipwreck hazards. Similarly, roadwork crews use
neon orange traffic cones to warn drivers of potential dangers
ahead, such as bumps or potholes. Although these bright,
uniquely colored objects seem phenomenologically salient,
researchers disagree whether they automatically Bcapture^ vi-
sual attention.
Currently, two directly opposed theoretical accounts pre-
vail in the attentional capture literature. According to stimu-
lus-driven theories, salient signals automatically capture vi-
suospatial attention, regardless of a viewer’s goals. Support
for these theories often comes from studies using the addition-
al singleton paradigm (Theeuwes, 1992). Participants search
displays of diamond distractors for a circle target and report
the orientation of a line inside the circle. On half of trials, a
color singleton appears at a nontarget location. Typically, par-
ticipants are slower to respond to the target when the singleton
is present than when it is absent. This singleton-presence cost
is taken as evidence that the task-irrelevant singleton automat-
ically captured spatial attention, slowing attentional allocation
to the target.
Stimulus-driven theories garner further support from studies
showing that salient stimuli can capture overt eye movements
(Theeuwes, Kramer, Hahn, & Irwin, 1998; Theeuwes, Kramer,
Hahn, Irwin, & Zelinsky, 1999). The underlying assumption of
these studies is that participants cannot make an overt eye
movement to one location while covertly shifting spatial atten-
tion to another location (Hoffman & Subramaniam, 1995). In
other words, an overt shift of attention necessarily implies a
preceding shift of covert attention. For example, Theeuwes,
De Vries, and Godijn (2003, Experiment 1) adapted the
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(doi:10.3758/s13414-016-1209-1) contains supplementary material,
which is available to authorized users.
* Nicholas Gaspelin
ngaspelin@ucdavis.edu
1
Center for Mind and Brain, University of California, Davis, 267
Cousteau Place, Davis, CA 95618, USA
Atten Percept Psychophys
DOI 10.3758/s13414-016-1209-1


additional singleton paradigm for eye tracking. Initial saccades
were equally likely to land on the irrelevant color singleton and
on the target, suggesting that salient features automatically cap-
tured overt and covert attention.
According to the logic of these studies, capture of overt atten-
tion necessarily implies the capture of covert attention. However,
the absence of overt capture does not imply the absence of covert
attentional capture. Indeed, to explain instances where salient
stimuli produce no observable overt capture effects, stimulus-
driven theorists may invoke the rapid disengagement hypothesis
(Theeuwes et al., 2003, Experiment 2; Theeuwes, 2010).
According to this account, covert attention initially moves to
the most salient item in the display, but the salient item can then
be rapidly rejected so that the target is attended with little delay.
This hypothesis makes two relevant predictions about overt cap-
ture effects. First, covert attention may reject the salient item
before overt eye movements are initiated, resulting in large
singleton-presence costs on manual response time (RT), but no
accompanying oculomotor capture effects (see Theeuwes et al.,
2003, Experiment 2). A second prediction is that covert attention
may initially be captured by the salient item, but relatively fast
eye movements are initiated before the singleton is rejected. This
would lead to large oculomotor capture effects on trials with fast
saccades and small oculomotor capture effects on trials with slow
saccades. For example, van Zoest, Donk, and Theeuwes (2004,
Experiment 3) found that, in an additional singleton paradigm,
participants made fewer eye movements to targets when saccades
were initiated quickly, which they interpreted to support a rapid
disengagement model.
In contrast to stimulus-driven theories, goal-driven theories
propose that an individual’s goals determine whether salient
stimuli capture attention (Folk, Remington, & Johnston,
1992). In other words, visual attention is involuntarily guided
to objects that have features matching what the observer is
looking for (called an attentional set). For example, a shopper
looking for a red can of soup would be involuntarily captured
by other red items, such as a red sale sign. However, the
shopper would not be captured by nonred items, such as a
bright yellow wet floor sign.
To explain apparent instances of stimulus-driven capture,
goal-driven theorists note that the target itself is a feature sin-
gleton in many of additional singleton paradigm studies,
which might lead participants to adopt a broad attentional set
for any feature singleton (called singleton-detection mode;
Bacon & Egeth, 1994). Many studies have demonstrated that
when participants are instead encouraged to search for a spe-
cific shape (called feature-search mode), salient stimuli no
longer capture covert attention (Bacon & Egeth, 1994;
Cosman & Vecera, 2013; Leber & Egeth, 2006) or overt at-
tention (Leonard & Luck, 2011; Theeuwes et al., 2003; Wu &
Remington, 2003). For example, Leonard and Luck (2011)
had participants perform an additional singleton paradigm,
as described above. In Experiment 1, participants searched
for a pop-out shape whose exact identity varied randomly trial
by trial (e.g., circle among diamonds or diamond among cir-
cles). First saccades landed on isoluminant color singletons on
a high percentage of trials (15.5 %). In Experiment 2, the exact
identity of the target was held constant across trials, allowing
participants to use feature-search mode to search for a specific
feature. Here, first saccades landed on isoluminant color sin-
gletons on significantly fewer trials (9.8 %).
In summary, stimulus-driven and goal-driven accounts
make opposing predictions about when to expect attentional
capture. Many researchers have suggested the need for a more
coherent account of attentional capture (Awh, Belopolsky, &
Theeuwes, 2012). Resolving this empirical debate with a more
nuanced account would greatly benefit our ability to predict
eye movements in naturalistic scenes (Henderson, 2003), de-
sign more accurate models of visual search (Wolfe, 2007;
Wolfe, Cave, & Franzel, 1989), and understand the develop-
ment of cognitive control in typical (Gaspelin, Margett-
Jordan, & Ruthruff, 2014) and atypical (Leonard, Robinson,
Hahn, Gold, & Luck, 2014) populations.
Signal suppression hypothesis
Sawaki and Luck (2010) proposed a reconciliation to this
debate, called the signal suppression hypothesis. According
to this hybrid model, a salient stimulus in a visual scene gen-
erates a bottom-up Battend-to-me^ signal that has the potential
to capture attention even if it does not match the observer’s
goals, consistent with stimulus-driven theories. However, this
salience signal can be actively suppressed by means of top-
down control processes so that it does not actually capture
attention, consistent with top-down theories. This hypothesis
differs from stimulus-driven theories in proposing that the
salience signal can be suppressed before attention is captured,
and it differs from goal-driven theories in proposing that at-
tention will be automatically captured by salient-but-irrelevant
stimuli if the salience signal is not suppressed.
According to the signal suppression hypothesis, the active
suppression process can be indexed by the distractor positivity
(PD) component of the event-related potential (ERP) wave-
form (Hickey, Di Lollo, & McDonald, 2009; Sawaki &
Luck, 2010). The initial support for the signal suppression
hypothesis came from studies demonstrating a PD component
to salient stimuli in the absence of behavioral capture (Burra &
Kerzel, 2014; Eimer & Kiss, 2008; Gaspar, Christie, Prime,
Jolicoeur, & McDonald, 2016; Gaspar & McDonald, 2014;
Jannati, Gaspar, & McDonald, 2013; Sawaki & Luck, 2010,
2011). Separate studies have found independent behavioral
evidence for suppression of attentional capture by salient
items (Gaspelin, Leonard, & Luck, 2015; Jannati et al.,
2013; Moher & Egeth, 2012; Moher, Lakshmanan, Egeth, &
Ewen, 2014; Vatterott & Vecera, 2012). For example,
Atten Percept Psychophys


Gaspelin et al. (2015) developed a capture-probe paradigm in
which, on most trials, participants searched displays of shapes
for a specific target and made a speeded response to report the
location of a dot inside. On occasional probe trials, a letter
appeared briefly inside each item of the search array. On these
trials, participants were to recall as many letters as possible
rather than performing the search task (see also Kim & Cave,
1995). Under conditions that resulted in no behavioral capture
in the visual-search task, participants were actually less likely to
report the probe letter at the singleton location than the probe
letter at a given nonsingleton location, suggesting the singleton
was suppressed below baseline levels of processing.
Despite the aforementioned behavioral and electrophysio-
logical evidence for suppression of attentional allocation to
salient singletons, no studies have directly assessed whether
humans can actively suppress overt eye movements to salient
items. More specifically, no studies of oculomotor control
have demonstrated an oculomotor suppression effect—a low-
er likelihood that salient display items will be the target of the
initial eye movement compared to nonsalient display items.
This oculomotor evidence is important because previous be-
havioral suppression effects (e.g., in Gaspelin et al., 2015)
may have resulted from suppression at a number of processing
stages (e.g., in memory encoding). If suppression can be ob-
served at relatively short saccadic latencies, this will constrain
the possible mechanisms that underlie the suppression.
Some studies have demonstrated that oculomotor capture
by salient color singletons can be avoided under certain con-
ditions (Leonard & Luck, 2011; Wu & Remington, 2003).
However, these studies did not find that participants were less
likely to fixate salient items than other nontarget display items.
Ipata, Gee, Gottlieb, Bisley, and Goldberg (2006), however,
did observe such a singleton suppression effect in macaque
monkeys. They found that highly trained monkeys made few-
er first saccades to singleton distractors (2 %) than to the
average nonsingleton distractor (8 %). However, the monkeys
in this study performed approximately 36,000 trials, and it is
unclear if the observed oculomotor suppression would gener-
alize to humans making eye movements in the natural world
or to humans performing laboratory tasks for an hour or two.
Furthermore, the article did not report the time course of sup-
pression, which is essential for ruling out alternative explana-
tions such as the rapid disengagement hypothesis (e.g., see our
Experiment 2). In short, the current evidence for oculomotor
suppression is limited, at best.
The Current Study
In this study, we provide further support the signal suppres-
sion hypothesis, demonstrating active suppression of oculo-
motor capture by salient-but-irrelevant color singletons in
humans under typical laboratory conditions. Participants
performed a variant of the additional singleton paradigm that
was modified for eye tracking (see Fig. 1). To modulate cap-
ture by color singletons, we used a similar method to Gaspelin
et al. (2015) of manipulating search mode (singleton detection
mode vs. feature search mode). We predicted that when the
task encouraged participants to search for singletons, the ini-
tial saccade on each trial should be more likely to be directed
toward the singleton distractor than toward the average
nonsingleton distractor (an oculomotor capture effect). In con-
trast, when the task encouraged participants to attend to the
specific shape of the target and avoid singletons, the initial
saccade should be less likely to be directed toward the single-
ton distractor than toward the average nonsingleton distractor
(an oculomotor suppression effect). We also investigated the
time course of singleton suppression effects to rule out the
rapid disengagement hypothesis (see Experiments 2 and 3).
Experiment 1
Experiment 1 was designed to validate our measures of ocu-
lomotor capture under conditions in which irrelevant single-
tons are known to capture attention. The target itself was a
shape singleton (a circle amongst diamonds or a diamond
amongst circles). The specific shape of the target varied ran-
domly by trial, forcing participants to use a singleton-
Fig. 1 Stimuli from Experiment 1. The screen was blank for 500 ms at
the beginning of each trial. A fixation cross then appeared, and
participants were required to hold their gaze on this point for 500 ms.
Finally, the search array appeared and remained visible until the
participant responded. Participants searched for the unique shape in the
display (a diamond among circles or a circle among diamonds, randomly
intermixed). They then reported (via button press) whether the small
black line inside the unique shape was tilted left or right. In grayscale
versions of this figure, solid lined shapes were one color (e.g., green)
while dashed lined shapes were another color (e.g., red). See the online
article for color versions of all figures in this paper
Atten Percept Psychophys


detection mode strategy. This strategy is known to produce
large oculomotor capture effects (Leonard & Luck, 2011;
Theeuwes et al., 2003). If our task is a valid measure of ocu-
lomotor capture, the first saccade on each trial should be more
likely to be directed toward singleton distractors than to the
average nonsingleton distractor.
Method
Participants We chose an a priori sample size of 20 partici-
pants per experiment on the basis of our prior behavioral re-
search on singleton suppression (Gaspelin et al., 2015) and
previous eye-tracking studies (Leonard & Luck, 2011). The
participants were University of California, Davis students who
were paid for participating. One participant in Experiment 1
had abnormally high manual response times (more than 2.5
standard deviations from the group mean) and was replaced.
Of the final sample of 20 participants, 16 were female and four
were male. The mean age was 21.8 years. All participants had
normal color vision and had normal or corrected-to-normal
visual acuity.
Apparatus Stimuli were presented using PsychToolbox
(Brainard, 1997) on an LCD monitor with a black background
that was placed at a viewing distance of 100 cm. A
photosensor was used to measure the timing delay of the mon-
itor (32 ms), and this delay was subtracted from all latency
values reported here. An SR Research Eyelink 1000 desk-
mounted system recorded eye position monocularly from the
right eye at 500 Hz.
Stimuli and procedure The stimuli are illustrated in Fig. 1.
Each search display contained six items distributed at equal
distances around a notional circle with a radius of 4.5°. The
individual stimuli were diamonds (0.8° × 0.8°) and circles
(0.9° diameter) drawn in red (23.3 cd/m2, x = .65, y = .34) or
green (23.3 cd/m2, x = .29, y = .63). Each shape contained a
black line subtending 0.30° × 0.05° that was tilted 45° to the
left or right. A gray fixation cross (23.3 cd/m2, 0.1° by 0.1°)
was continuously visible except during the intertrial interval.
The search target was defined as the unique shape,
which was unpredictably a circle among identical dia-
monds or a diamond among identical circles. The task
was to report whether the line inside the target shape tilted
to the left or right (by pressing game-pad buttons with the
left or right index fingers). Pilot studies indicated that
participants could not easily report the orientation of the
target line without fixating it. Thus, our task implicitly
required eye movements, but we did not explicitly instruct
participants to move their eyes toward the target. Target
location and target line tilt varied randomly. All items
were a single color on 50 % of trials (red for half of the
participants and green for the others), and one item was
drawn in the other color on the remaining trials. The lo-
cation of this color singleton distractor was random, ex-
cept that it was never the target location. Participants were
told this and were encouraged to ignore the color
singleton.
Trials began with the presentation of a blank screen for
500 ms. This was followed by a fixation screen containing
only the fixation point; this screen remained visible until the
participant maintained fixation within a 1.5° radius of the
fixation point for 500 ms. The search array then appeared
and remained visible until response. If participants took too
long to respond (more than 3,000 ms), a time-out display
appeared with the text BToo Slow^ for 500 ms. If the response
was incorrect, a 200-Hz tone sounded for 500 ms. The blank
screen for the next trial then appeared immediately.
Participants practiced the search task for two blocks of 64
trials. The main experiment consisted of six blocks of 64 trials,
yielding 384 trials, 192 with and 192 without an irrelevant
singleton. Participants received block-by-block feedback on
mean response time (RT) and accuracy. At the beginning of
each block, the eye tracker was calibrated using a 9-point
calibration technique. During the main task, the eye tracker
was recalibrated if a participant failed to fixate the central
cross for more than 8 seconds at the beginning of a trial.
Analysis The onset of a saccade was defined using a mini-
mum eye velocity threshold of 30° per second and a minimum
acceleration threshold of 9,500° per second. To classify the
landing position of the first saccade on each trial, an annulus
was defined that was centered on the fixation cross, with an
inner radius of 1.5° and an outer radius of 7.5°. First saccades
were defined as the first eye movement landing inside the
annulus. The landing position was then classified by selecting
the nearest search item. This technique effectively created
wedge-shaped interest areas around each search item.
Saccadic latency was measured as the start time of the first
saccade that landed in the annulus.1
We excluded trials with abnormal manual response times
(less than 200 ms or greater than 2,000 ms, accounting for
0.6 % of trials), trials in which participants made no eye move-
ment (1.7 % of trials), and trials with abnormal saccade laten-
cies (less than 50 ms or greater than 1,000 ms, accounting for
3.6 % of trials). Additionally, we excluded trials with manual
response errors (2.7 %) from all analyses except manual re-
sponse error analyses. Altogether, 6.8 % of trials were exclud-
ed. In all analyses of variance (ANOVAs) reported in this
article, we report the Greenhouse–Geisser corrected p value.
1 The basic pattern of results in every experiment of this article was the
same with or without the interest area annulus.
Atten Percept Psychophys


Results
Manual responses
As shown in Fig. 2a, manual responses in the search task were
slower when the color singleton was present (852 ms) than when
it was absent (801 ms)—a 51-ms singleton-presence cost, t(19) =
7.29, p < .001. These results confirm that this task effectively
yielded strong attentional capture by the irrelevant color single-
ton. Error rates were similar for singleton-absent trials (2.7 %)
and singleton-present trials (2.7 %), t(19) < 1, p = .821.
Some goal-driven researchers have argued that singleton-
presence costs may reflect nonspatial filtering costs (Folk &
Remington, 1998) in which the appearance of the singleton
disrupts processing without attracting spatial attention to its
location. To argue against this account, previous researchers
have shown that singleton interference increases when the
singleton appears closer to the target (Gaspar & McDonald,
2014; Mounts, 2000). As shown in Fig. 2b, manual responses
were indeed much slower when the singleton appeared at the
+/-60° angular distance from the target compared to when the
singleton appeared at the +/-120° or 180° angular distances.
To formally analyze this trend, we conducted a one-way re-
peated-measures ANOVA comparing mean manual RTs at
each singleton angular distance (60°, 120°, 180°, -120°, and
-60°) on singleton-present trials. This yielded a main effect of
singleton angular distance, F(4, 76) = 21.94, p < .001, ηp
2 =
.536, indicating that manual RT declines as the angular dis-
tance between the target and the irrelevant singleton increases.
First saccade destination
If the singleton distractor captures the eyes, first saccades
should be more likely to move to the singleton distractor than
to the average nonsingleton distractor. As shown in Fig. 2c,
we found that first saccades were nearly twice as likely to be
directed toward the singleton distractor (16 %) as the average
nonsingleton distractor (9 %) when the color singleton was
present (see the part of Fig. 2c labeled oculomotor capture
effect). This 7 % singleton enhancement effect was statistically
significant, t(19) = 2.58, p = .02, and it demonstrates that our
oculomotor capture task provides a sensitive means of
assessing the capture of overt attention.
We also examined how the presence or absence of a sin-
gleton impacted first saccades to the target and nonsingleton
distractor items. If the singleton captures the eyes, then the
first saccade should be less likely to land on the target location.
Indeed, first saccades were less likely to land in the target
region when the singleton was present than when the singleton
was absent (see the leftmost portion of Fig. 2c). First saccades
to the nonsingleton distractor locations were not influenced by
the presence or absence of the color singleton.
These effects of singleton presence on first saccades to the
target and average nonsingleton-distractor locations were an-
alyzed in a two-way ANOVA with factors of singleton pres-
ence and item type (target vs. average nonsingleton
distractor). This ANOVA excluded data from the singleton
location itself, which was necessary to obtain a balanced fac-
torial design given that there was no singleton distractor loca-
tion in singleton-absent trials. First saccades were more likely
to be directed toward the target location (54 %) than toward
nonsingleton distractor locations (12 %), which led to a sig-
nificant main effect of item type, F(1, 19) = 103.69, p < .001,
ηp
2 = .845. This 42 % effect presumably reflects the attention-
al priority of the target. The finding that first saccades were
less likely to be directed toward the target on singleton-present
trials than on singleton-absent trials led to both a significant
main effect of singleton presence, F(1, 19) = 22.47, p < .001,
ηp
2 = .542, and a significant interaction between singleton
presence and search item type, F(1, 19) = 27.32, p < .001,
ηp
2 = .590. Follow-up t tests indicated that the difference be-
tween singleton-present and singleton-absent trials was signif-
icant at the target location (8 %), t(19) = 5.24, p < .001, but
was not significant at the nonsingleton-distractor locations
(0 %), t(19) > 1, p = .43. These results provide additional
evidence that gaze was captured by the irrelevant singleton,
thereby decreasing the probability that the initial saccade
would be directed toward the target.
Oculomotor capture effects by singleton angular distance
To provide a more direct picture of the distribution of first sac-
cade positions, we created heat maps showing the spatial distri-
bution of first saccades. The data were rotated so that the target
location appears at the 12 o’clock position. As shown in Fig. 2d,
participants were generally more likely to fixate the location of
the singleton distractor than to fixate that same location on
singleton-absent trials. Formal statistical analyses of these heat
maps are presented in supplementary online materials.
Saccadic latencies
We also analyzed saccadic latencies as a function of saccade
landing position and singleton presence. One participant never
fixated the color singleton and was removed from this analy-
sis. As shown in Table 1, saccadic latencies were faster for
first saccades that landed on the singleton distractor (215 ms)
than for first saccades that landed on a nonsingleton distractor
(229 ms), t(18) = 2.44, p = .03, or on the target (263 ms), t(18)
= 5.93, p < .001, replicating previous research (Theeuwes
et al., 2003; Theeuwes et al., 1999). There was a nonsignifi-
cant trend for first saccades that landed on the target to be
faster when the singleton was present (256 ms) rather than
absent (263 ms), t(18) = 1.87, p = .08, consistent with previous
studies (van Zoest et al., 2004).
Atten Percept Psychophys


Discussion
Experiment 1 demonstrated the validity and sensitivity of our
oculomotor capture task. We observed large behavioral and oc-
ulomotor capture effects by task-irrelevant color singletons. Of
particular importance, first saccades were more likely to be di-
rected toward singleton items than nonsingleton items, indicating
that overt attention was captured. These findings demonstrate
that our methods can replicate the oculomotor capture effects
observed in previous studies (Theeuwes et al., 2003; Theeuwes
et al., 1998; Theeuwes et al., 1999), which was necessary to
Table 1
Mean saccadic latency (ms) by first saccade landing position
for Experiment 1
Target
Nonsingleton
Distractor
Singleton
Distractor
Singleton Present
263 (53.9)
229 (45.7)
215 (27.8)
Singleton Absent
256 (46.5)
223 (36.0)
–
Note. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.
Fig. 2 Results from Experiment 1. (a) Manual response time as a
function of singleton presence. (b) Manual response times as a function
of the angular distance between the irrelevant singleton and the target. (c)
Percentage of first saccades that landed on a given stimulus type (target,
nonsingleton distractor, or singleton) on trials with and without a color
singleton. For the nonsingleton distractors, this is the mean per distractor,
not the mean summed across the several distractors. (d) Heat maps of
first-saccade landing position for each singleton position relative to the
target location. The data from each trial have been rotated as if the top
location contained the target. Arrows point to the singleton location. All
heat maps were generated using a Gaussian filter with a smoothing kernel
of 0.3° of visual angle. All error bars shown here and in subsequent
figures represent within-subject 95 % confidence intervals (Loftus &
Masson, 1994). See the online article for a color version of this figure.
(Color figure online)
Atten Percept Psychophys


establish the validity of our approach for assessing oculomotor
suppression in the following experiments.
Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we made relatively subtle changes to the
stimuli to encourage participants to search for a specific fea-
ture value and discourage singleton detection mode. Each the-
ory makes a unique prediction about the probability that the
first saccade will land on the singleton compared to a given
nonsingleton distractor under these conditions. Goal-driven
theories assume no special processing of feature singletons
per se. Thus, previous goal-driven studies lead to the predic-
tion of an equivalent probability that the first saccade will be
directed toward the singleton or toward a given nonsingleton
distractor (Folk et al., 1992). Stimulus-driven theories propose
singletons should still attract the eyes, leading to an increased
probability that the first saccade will be directed to the single-
ton (an oculomotor capture effect). The signal suppression
hypothesis proposes that singletons will be actively sup-
pressed, leading to a decreased probability that the first sac-
cade will be directed toward the singleton relative to a given
nonsingleton distractor (an oculomotor suppression effect).
The rapid disengagement hypothesis could also potentially
explain a decreased probability that the first saccade was di-
rected toward the singleton. This hypothesis proposes that
covert attention is captured by the salient item but can rapidly
disengage from it, eliminating any oculomotor capture effects.
We tested several predictions of this hypothesis. First, a shift
of covert attention to the color singleton will take some time
(Theeuwes, 2010). Because there is no delay between the
singleton and search display in this study, rapid disengage-
ment predicts an observable behavioral costs on manual RT
(Chen & Mordkoff, 2007; Theeuwes, Atchley, & Kramer,
2000; Theeuwes et al., 2003, Experiment 2). The signal sup-
pression hypothesis, however, proposes that items are sup-
pressed without an initial shift of attention, which should lead
to no observable behavioral costs on manual RT.
A second prediction of the rapid disengagement hypothesis
is that gaze will sometimes shift before the singleton has been
rejected, and on these trials the first saccade will likely be di-
rected toward the color singleton (van Zoest et al., 2004). Thus,
according to this account, the fastest saccades should be more
likely to land on the color singleton distractor than the average
nonsingleton distractors (i.e., an oculomotor capture effect as in
Experiment 1). By contrast, the signal suppression hypothesis
posits no initial shift of attention to the color singleton, and no
overt capture effects should be present even on trials with the
fastest saccade latencies. We performed two converging tests to
investigate this possibility: (1) We investigated the landing po-
sition of the fastest quartile of saccades, and (2) we investigated
average eye position at each moment in time, which does not
require considering saccades as temporally discrete events and
does not require dividing trials into discrete categories on the
basis of saccadic reaction time.
Method
The methods were identical to those of Experiment 1 with the
following changes. First, a new set of 20 students participated
(16 females and four males; mean age: 21.1 years). Second,
search displays were modified to encourage participants to
search for a specific shape rather than searching for singletons
(see Fig. 3). Specifically, the target was always the diamond
for half of the participants and always the circle for the other
half. To prevent the target from Bpopping out,^ distractor
shapes were randomly generated as squares (0.8° in width
and height), hexagons (0.8° in width and height), and the
unselected target shape (circle in the diamond-target condition
and diamond in the circle-target condition), with the constraint
that no distractor shape could be used in the same search
display more than twice. By keeping the target shape constant
for a given participant, and by presenting it among a hetero-
geneous set of distractor shapes, this experiment promoted
feature search mode and eliminated any incentives to inten-
tionally search for singletons (Bacon & Egeth, 1994).
We excluded trials with abnormal manual response times
(1.4 %; less than 200 ms or greater than 2,000 ms), trials in
which participants made no eye movement (0.8 %), and trials
with abnormal saccade latencies (2.6 %; less than 50 ms or
greater than 1,000 ms) from all analyses. Additionally, we
excluded trials with manual response errors (2.6 %) from all
analyses except manual response error analyses. Altogether,
6.5 % of trials were excluded.
Fig. 3 Example search array from Experiment 2. Each participant was
assigned to a target group (circle or diamond), which remained constant
throughout the experiment for that participant. Participants were
instructed to report the orientation of the line inside the target.
Distractors were heterogeneous shapes to prevent the target from
popping out. In grayscale versions of this figure, solid lined shapes
were one color (e.g., green) while dashed lined shapes were another
color (e.g., red). See the online article for a color version of this figure
Atten Percept Psychophys


Results
Manual responses
As shown in Fig. 4a, manual responses in the search task were
actually slightly faster when the color singleton was present
(840 ms) than when it was absent (853 ms), although this 13-
ms singleton presence benefit was only marginally significant,
t(19) = 1.90, p = .07. This kind of reversed capture effect has
been observed in previous experiments using feature-search tasks
(e.g., Gaspelin et al., 2015), and it is consistent with a decreased
attentional priority at the singleton location, which effectively
reduces the set size. There was also a trend for participants also
committed more errors on singleton-absent trials (3.0 %) than on
singleton-present trials (2.5 %), t(19) = 1.86, p = .08.
We also assessed whether RTs differed as a function of the
angular distance between the target and the singleton, using
the same ANOVA design as in Experiment 1. As shown in
Fig. 4b, there was no hint of longer mean RTs at the closer
distances, and the main effect of angular distance was not
significant, F(4, 76) < 1, p = .647, ηp
2 = .029. These results
provide additional evidence that the color singleton did not
capture covert attention, as predicted by stimulus-driven
models such as the rapid disengagement hypothesis.
First saccade destination
If the color singleton is actively suppressed, the first saccade
should be less likely to land on the singleton distractor than to
land on the average nonsingleton distractor. As shown in Fig. 4c,
first saccades were much less likely to be directed to singleton
distractors (4 %) than to the average nonsingleton distractor
(10 %), t(19) = 7.07, p < .001 (see the part of Fig. 4c labeled
oculomotor suppression effect). This 6 % suppression effect is
consistent with the signal suppression hypothesis but inconsis-
tent with purely goal-driven or stimulus-driven accounts.
We also analyzed the effect of singleton presence on first
saccades to the target and nonsingleton distractors in a two-way
ANOVA (excluding the singleton location, as in Experiment 1).
This ANOVAyielded an effect of item type, F(1, 19) = 101.92, p
< .001, ηp
2 = .843, indicating that first saccades were more likely
to be directed toward the target (55 %) than toward the average
nonsingleton distractor (10 %). This 45 % effect presumably
reflects the top-down attentional priority of the target. The
ANOVA also yielded a marginally significant main effect of
singleton presence, F(1, 19) = 3.573, p = .07, ηp
2 = .158,
reflecting the finding that first saccades were slightly more likely
to be directed to targets and nonsingleton distractors on
singleton-present trials (33 %) than on singleton-absent trials
(31 %). The interaction between singleton presence and item type
was not significant, F(1, 19) < 1, p = .985, ηp
2 = .001, indicating
that the presence of a singleton had no differential effect on first
saccades to the target versus the nonsingleton distractors.
Suppression effects by singleton angular distance
Figure 4d uses heat maps to provide a more detailed picture of
the distribution of first saccade landing positions. Participants
were generally less likely to fixate the location of a singleton
distractor than to fixate the same location on singleton-absent
trials. For example, very few first saccades landed at the -60°
location when this location contained the singleton than when
the singleton at one of the other locations. Formal statistical
analyses of these heat maps are presented in supplementary
online materials. Here, we briefly note that suppression effects
were significant at each singleton angular distance (p < .01).
Saccadic latencies
We analyzed saccadic latencies as a function of saccade des-
tination and singleton presence. One participant never fixated
the color singleton and was removed from the analysis. As
shown in Table 2, saccadic latencies were shorter for first
saccades that landed on the singleton distractor (194 ms) than
for first saccades that landed on the nonsingleton distractor
(218 ms), t(18) = 2.62, p = .02, or target (245 ms), t(18) =
5.00, p < .001. At first glance, these results may seem to
support rapid disengagement. However, such differences in
saccadic latencies could also be explained by the signal sup-
pression hypothesis: Top-down control may wax and wane
from trial-to-trial, and gaze will be captured by the singleton
primarily on trials with poor top-down control. As shown by
research using the antisaccade task (reviewed by Hutton &
Ettinger, 2006), saccadic latencies are likely to be fastest on
trials with poor top-down control, and this would lead to faster
saccadic RTs when gaze is directed to the singleton.
Note that saccade latencies for first fixations to the target
were not significantly different when the color singleton was
present versus absent, t(18) = 1.46, p = .16. In fact, the non-
significant trend went in the opposite direction predicted by
rapid disengagement models (van Zoest et al., 2004), with
participants being slightly faster when the singleton was pres-
ent (245 ms) than when it was absent (250 ms).
Suppression effects for the fastest quartile of saccadic
latencies
To directly assess the rapid disengagement hypothesis, we clas-
sified each participant’s saccadic latencies into four quartiles:
fastest saccade trials, fast saccade trials, slow saccade trials, and
slowest saccade trials.2 We then compared oculomotor suppres-
sion effects in each quartile, defined as the difference in the
2 We chose to divide the data into four quantiles (rather than eight or 10)
because it maintained reasonably high statistical power (48 singleton-
present trials per quantile) while allowing us to observe a wide range of
mean saccadic latencies.
Atten Percept Psychophys


proportion of first saccades directed to the singleton location
versus the average nonsingleton location on singleton-present
trials (see Table 3). The rapid disengagement hypothesis predicts
that in the fastest quartile, first saccades should be more likely to
land on the singleton distractor than on the average nonsingleton
distractor (van Zoest et al., 2004). The signal suppression hypoth-
esis, however, posits no initial shift of attention to the color sin-
gleton, and no singleton capture effect should be present even on
fast-saccade trials. As shown in Table 3, we found approximately
equivalent oculomotor suppression effects at all four quartiles.
Critically, in the fastest quartile (mean latency: 174 ms), first
saccades were significantly less likely to land on the singleton
distractor than on the average nonsingleton distractor, t(19) =
3.75, p = .001. Suppression effects were significant in each of
the other quartiles as well (p < .001). We also compared the
suppression effects across quartiles in a one-way ANOVA, and
Fig. 4 Results from Experiment 2. (a) Manual response time as a
function of singleton presence. (b) Manual response time as a function
of the angular distance between the irrelevant singleton and the target. (c)
Percentage of first saccades that landed on a given stimulus type (target,
nonsingleton distractor, or singleton). (d) Heat maps of first saccade
landing position for each singleton position relative to the target
location. The data from each trial have been rotated as if the top
location contained the target. Arrows point to the singleton location.
See the online article for a color version of this figure. (Color figure
online)
Table 2
Mean saccadic latency (ms) by first saccade landing position
for Experiment 2
Target
Nonsingleton
Distractor
Singleton
Distractor
Singleton Present
245 (42.1)
218 (36.5)
194 (35.4)
Singleton Absent
250 (48.9)
218 (40.3)
–
Note. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.
Atten Percept Psychophys


we found that the magnitude of the suppression did not signifi-
cantly differ by quartile, F(3, 57) < 1, p = .433, ηp
2 = .043. These
results directly contradict the prediction of the rapid disengage-
ment hypothesis that the singleton should capture gaze when the
saccadic latencies are fast. Instead, these results are consistent
with the signal suppression hypothesis.
Continuous gaze position
To further test the rapid disengagement hypothesis, we also
examined gaze position at each sample point, eliminating the
need to divide the data into quantiles and to identify saccades
and fixations. The data are shown in Fig. 5. Each trial was
normalized so that the target appeared at the 12 o’clock posi-
tion. Trials were then separated on the basis of the angular
distance between the singleton and the target. We then plotted
gaze position at each sample point for the first 400 ms of each
trial. The rapid disengagement hypothesis predicts that gaze
should be more likely to be directed toward the color singleton
than toward the average nonsingleton distractor early in the
trial (an oculomotor capture effect), and only later in the trial
should gaze be more likely to be directed toward the average
nonsingleton distractor than toward the color singleton.
Animated plots for each angular distance can be found
online as supplementary material (and make the pattern of
data extremely clear). Figure 5a shows representative plots
from the -60° angular distance at selected time points. Gaze
locations initially start near the fixation point and then become
distributed among the display items. Before the 200-ms time
point, the number of samples within the singleton region was
no greater than the number of samples within the nonsingleton
distractor regions. As the trial progressed, however, gaze po-
sitions become more selective, with most samples located
within the target region, fewer within the nonsingleton
distractor regions, and even fewer within the singleton
distractor region. The key observation is that, in contrast with
the prediction of the rapid disengagement hypothesis, gaze
samples early in the trial were not more likely to be directed
toward the color singleton than toward the other locations.
To formally analyze these data, we determined the closest
object to the current gaze position at each sample point (every
2 ms). This effectively divided the entire search display into six
pie-slice-shaped regions of interest. We then computed the pro-
portion of gaze positions in each region (target, singleton
distractor, and average of the nonsingleton distractors) for each
time sample. For simplicity, we averaged the data over all sin-
gleton angular distances, as shown in Fig. 5b. We then ran t tests
comparing the proportion of samples in the singleton region
versus the proportion of samples in the nonsingleton regions at
each time point. Time points with a significant difference (uncor-
rected for multiple comparisons) are shaded in gray in Fig. 5b. As
the figure shows, samples were equally likely to be in the target,
singleton distractor, and nonsingleton distractor regions until ap-
proximately 200 ms, and at no time point were samples more
likely to occur in the singleton region than in the average of the
nonsingleton distractor regions. Gaze samples were significantly
more likely to be located within the average of the nonsingleton
distractor regions than within the singleton region from 208 ms to
400 ms after the search array onset.
Because uncorrected p values were used in these analyses,
it was necessary to provide an additional analysis using an
approach that can control the Type I error rate. We therefore
used a nonparametric permutation-based analysis that was
originally developed to assess the time course of differences
between event-related potential waveforms (Groppe, Urbach,
& Kutas, 2011; Maris & Oostenveld, 2007) and has been
adapted to assess the time course of differences in gaze posi-
tion (Oakes, Baumgartner, Barrett, Messenger, & Luck,
2013).3 We conducted 1,000 random permutations of the data,
and the observed run length of 91 consecutive samples was
well beyond the 95th percentile of the null distribution. Thus,
the observed period of differences between the singleton
3 This approach assumes that gaze position is relatively stable from sam-
ple to sample, so true differences between conditions will typically con-
sist of long runs of sample periods in which an uncorrected significant
difference is present. The approach then asks whether the observed length
of a run of significant t values is greater than one would expect by chance.
A permutation analysis is conducted in which the location labels are
randomly permuted trial by trial to obtain an empirical null distribution
of the number of consecutive significant differences that would be ex-
pected by chance. If the observed number of consecutive significant dif-
ferences is beyond the 95th percentile of this null distribution, then that
period of differences is considered statistically significant.
Table 3
Mean Saccadic latency (ms), likelihood of initially fixating the nonsingleton and singleton distractors, and suppression effects for each
saccadic latency quartile in Experiment 2
Quartile
Mean Saccadic Latency
Nonsingleton Distractor
Singleton Distractor
Suppression Effect
Fastest
174
14 %
7 %
7 %
Fast
209
11 %
3 %
8 %
Slow
239
9 %
2 %
7 %
Slowest
312
7 %
2 %
5 %
Note. Suppression effects were calculated as the percentage of saccades landing on the average nonsingleton distractor minus the percentage of saccades
landing on the singleton distractor on singleton-present trials.
Atten Percept Psychophys


region and the average of the nonsingleton distractor regions
was statistically significant.
We have additionally included this same gaze position analy-
sis for Experiment 1 in the supplementary online material. There,
we find oculomotor capture instead of oculomotor suppression,
demonstrating the general validity of our approach.
Altogether, the results for Experiment 2 provide no support
for the hypothesis that gaze was captured by the singleton
distractor early in the trial. Instead, the singleton location was
suppressed as soon as nonrandom eye movements were being
made.
Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 provide evidence that when
a task is designed in a manner to discourage singleton
detection mode, eye movements to singletons are active-
ly suppressed below baseline levels. This suppression
effect was directly predicted by the signal suppression
account but not by traditional goal-driven or stimulus-
driven theories. Furthermore, there was no evidence that
this suppression effect reflected an initial capture of co-
vert attention by the salient item, followed by rapid
disengagement.
Experiment 3
An alternative explanation for the results of Experiment 2 is
that all of the eye movements were too slow to observe an
initial attentional capture by the singleton distractor. Two fac-
tors might have slowed saccades in that experiment. First, par-
ticipants were required to hold their gaze at the central fixation
point for 500 ms before the search array appeared. This long
fixation requirement might have encouraged slow, highly con-
trolled eye movements. Second, the fixation point remained
visible when the search array appeared, which is known to lead
to slower saccadic latencies (Fischer & Breitmeyer, 1987;
Reuter-Lorenz, Hughes, & Fendrich, 1991).
In Experiment 3, we replicated Experiment 2, but with two
changes designed to encourage faster saccade latencies. First,
we used a more relaxed central fixation requirement (100 ms).
Second, the central fixation point disappeared at the onset of
the search array. According to the rapid disengagement hy-
pothesis, the faster saccadic reaction times resulting from
these changes in Experiment 3 should eliminate the oculomo-
tor suppression effects that we observed in Experiment 2 be-
cause the time to enact top-down suppression is reduced.
According to the signal suppression hypothesis, however, oc-
ulomotor suppression effects should still be robust.
Fig. 5 Gaze position as a function of time relative to stimulus onset in
Experiment 2. An animated plot can be found online as supplementary
material. (a) Scatterplots of gaze position at selected time points from
trials in which the singleton was 60° counterclockwise from the target
(with the data rotated so that the target appears at the 12 o’clock position).
Each dot represents a participant’s eye position at that moment on a single
trial. At each time point from 200 ms onward, fewer gaze samples were
located in the irrelevant singleton location than in the average
nonsingleton distractor location. (b) Data from (a) reformatted as the
proportion of gaze samples in the three object interest regions (target,
singleton distractor, average nonsingleton distractor) at each time point.
To simplify the analyses, we averaged across every singleton angular
distance. Shaded gray regions represent regions where the suppression
effect (nonsingleton minus singleton) is statistically significant (p < .05).
(Color figure online)
Atten Percept Psychophys


Method
The methods were identical to those of Experiment 2 except
for the following changes. First, a new set of 20 students
participated (14 females and six males; mean age: 21.1 years).
Second, the search array appeared as soon as the participants
fixated the central fixation point for 100 ms. Third, the fixa-
tion cross disappeared from the center of the screen when the
search array appeared.
As in Experiment 2, we excluded trials with abnormal man-
ual response times (0.7 %; less than 200 ms or greater than
2,000 ms), trials in which participants made no eye move-
ments (0.1 %), and trials with abnormal saccade latencies
(2.2 %; less than 50 ms or greater than 1,000 ms) from all
analyses. Additionally, we excluded trials with manual re-
sponse errors (2.8 %) from all analyses except manual re-
sponse error analyses. Altogether, we excluded 5.5 % of trials.
Results
Manual responses
The manual response results (see Fig. 6a) were quite sim-
ilar to those from Experiment 2. Responses were faster
when the color singleton was present (820 ms) than when
it was absent (844 ms), and this 24-ms singleton-presence
benefit was significant, t(19) = 3.35, p = .003. Error rates
were similar on singleton present trials (2.7 %) and sin-
gleton absent trials (2.8 %), t(19) < 1, p = .96. Mean RT
did not significantly differ as a function of the angular
distance between the singleton and the target, F(4, 76) <
1, p = .473, ηp
2 = .043. If the color singleton captured
covert spatial attention but was rejected before eye move-
ments were initiated, we should have observed manual RT
capture effects. These findings are inconsistent with rapid
disengagement models.
Overall saccadic reaction times
This experiment was designed to produce faster saccadic la-
tencies than observed in Experiment 2. Consistent with this,
mean saccadic latencies (averaged across trial types) were
indeed faster in this experiment (202 ms) than in Experiment
2 (225 ms), t(37) = 2.56, p = .014. The mean saccade latencies
in this experiment were also within the range observed in other
additional singleton paradigm experiments (e.g., 251 ms in
Wu & Remington, 2003; 184 ms in Theeuwes et al., 2003,
Experiment 2).
First saccade destination
The first saccade landing position results (see Fig. 6c) repli-
cated those of Experiment 2. First saccades were much less
likely to be directed toward the singleton distractor (5 %) than
toward the average nonsingleton distractor (12 %), t(19) =
7.35, p < .001 (see the part of Fig. 6c labeled oculomotor
suppression effect). The magnitude of this singleton suppres-
sion effect was nearly identical in Experiment 2 (6 %) and
Experiment 3 (7 %), t(38) < 1, p = .55.
As in Experiment 2, we also analyzed the effect of
singleton presence on first saccades to the target and
nonsingleton distractors in a two-way ANOVA, excluding
the singleton location. First saccades were significantly
more likely to be directed to the target (45 %) than to
the average nonsingleton distractor (12 %), F(1, 19) =
38.233, p < .001, ηp
2 = .668. This 33 % effect presum-
ably reflects the attentional priority of the target. Note
that this target enhancement effect was marginally small-
er in this experiment (33 %) than in Experiment 2
(45 %), t(38) = 1.85, p = .07. This likely reflects a de-
creased preparedness for the upcoming search display in
this experiment, due to the decreased duration of central
fixation prior to the onset of the search array. The
ANOVA also indicated that first saccades were slightly
but significantly more likely to move toward both
nonsingleton distractors and targets when the singleton
was present (29 %) than when the singleton was absent
(28 %), F(1, 19) = 5.568, p = .029, ηp
2 = .227. This is
consistent with the singleton suppression account, be-
cause suppressing the singleton increases the opportunity
for gaze to be directed to the nonsingleton locations when
the singleton is present. Finally, the interaction of single-
ton presence and item type was not significant, F(1, 19)
< 1, p = .827, ηp
2 = .003.
Suppression effects by singleton angular distance
Heat maps (Fig. 6d) also replicated the pattern obtained in
Experiment 2: Participants were generally less likely to shift
gaze to a given location if it contained a singleton distractor
than a nonsingleton distractor. Suppression effects were sig-
nificant at each singleton angular distance (p < .001; see
details in supplementary online materials).
Saccadic latencies
As in Experiments 1 and 2, saccadic latencies were shorter
when participants first landed on the singleton distractor
(185 ms) than on a nonsingleton distractor (197 ms), t(19) =
2.53, p = .03, or target (216 ms), t(19) = 6.23, p < .001 (see
Table 4). Note, however, that saccade latencies when partici-
pants first landed on the target were not significantly different
when the singleton was present (216 ms) than when it was
absent (217 ms), t(19) < 1, p = .74. This finding is not consis-
tent with the rapid reorienting hypothesis.
Atten Percept Psychophys


Suppression effects for the fastest quartile of saccadic
latencies
We conducted the same tests as in Experiment 2 to determine
whether the overall pattern of results could be explained by an
initial shift of covert attention to the singleton followed by rapid
disengagement. First, we divided the data into quartiles on the
basis of saccadic latency (see Table 5). As in Experiment 2, we
observed significant suppression of gaze at the singleton location
even in the fastest quartile (mean latency: 165 ms), t(19) = 2.17, p
= .04. Suppression effects were also significant in all other quar-
tiles (p < .001). Unlike Experiment 2, the suppression effects
were smaller in the fastest quartile (3 %) than in slowest quartile
(7 %), and a one-way ANOVA yielded a significant main effect
of quartile, F(3, 57) = 5.41, p = .008, ηp
2 = .221. As will be
shown in next section, the fact that the oculomotor suppression
effect was smallest in the fastest quartile indicates that these very
rapid saccades were more likely to be random rather than con-
trolled. Thus, the fact that there was still significant suppression
and not enhancement of eye movements toward the singleton at
the fastest quartile—in which the mean saccadic RT was
165 ms—is consistent with the signal suppression hypothesis
and is inconsistent with the rapid disengagement hypothesis.
Continuous gaze position
We also examined gaze position at each sample period (see sup-
plementary material for an animated plot of each angular
Fig. 6 Results from Experiment 3. (a) Manual response time as a
function of singleton presence. (b) Manual response times as a function
of the angular distance between the irrelevant singleton and the target. (c)
Percentage of first saccades that landed on a given stimulus type (target,
nonsingleton distractor, or singleton). (d) Heat maps of first saccade
landing positon relative to the target, after rotating the data so that the
target location appears at the top. Arrows point to the singleton
location. See the online article for a color version of this figure. (Color
figure online)
Atten Percept Psychophys


distance). As shown in Fig. 7a, gaze position at the beginning of
the trial was randomly distributed among the singleton,
nonsingleton, and target locations. As the trial progressed, how-
ever, gaze position become more selective, with most samples
located within the target region, fewer within the nonsingleton
distractor regions, and even fewer within the singleton distractor
region. Thus, in contrast with the prediction of the rapid disen-
gagement hypothesis, gaze was not more likely to be directed
toward the color singleton than toward the other locations early
in the trial.
We performed the same formal analyses of these data as in
Experiment 2. As shown in Fig. 7b, samples were equally
likely to be in the target, singleton distractor, and nonsingleton
distractor regions until approximately 200 ms, and at no time
point were samples more likely to occur in the singleton re-
gion than in the average of the nonsingleton distractor regions.
Gaze samples were significantly more likely to be located
within the average of the nonsingleton distractor regions than
within the singleton region from 196 ms to 400 ms after the
search array onset, which was a significant effect after using a
permutation test to control the Type I error rate. This pattern of
results provides no support for the hypothesis that gaze was
captured by the singleton distractor early in the trial. Instead,
the singleton location was rapidly suppressed.
Discussion
Experiment 3 replicated the results of Experiment 2 using
methods that encouraged faster saccadic latencies to see if this
caused the emergence of singleton capture. Saccadic latencies
were indeed significantly faster in Experiment 3 than in
Experiment 2, but first saccades to the task-irrelevant color sin-
gleton were still suppressed. Further analyses revealed that this
suppression effect was not due to initial capture followed by
rapid disengagement. These results support the signal suppres-
sion hypothesis and are inconsistent with purely bottom-up and
top-down theories.
General discussion
A key debate in visual attention research is whether salient
stimuli, such as color singletons, can automatically capture vi-
sual attention. Stimulus-driven theories propose that salient
stimuli will be prioritized regardless of an observer’s goals,
whereas goal-driven theories propose that salient-but-
irrelevant stimuli have no special attention-attracting powers.
In this study, we investigated a hybrid signal suppression hy-
pothesis, which proposes that salient stimuli automatically gen-
erate a bottom-up Battend-to-me^ signal, but that this signal can
be actively suppressed by top-down control mechanisms to
prevent the allocation of attention to a salient item. Previous
research has shown some evidence of active suppression of
covert attention in behavioral studies (Gaspelin et al., 2015)
and electrophysiological studies (Gaspar & McDonald, 2014;
Sawaki & Luck, 2010), but there has been little evidence that
humans can actively suppress eye movements to salient-but-
irrelevant singletons below baseline levels of processing.
Summary of findings
Experiment 1 validated our general approach under conditions
that encouraged capture by color singletons. The target itself
was a singleton, which forced participants to establish an at-
tentional set for singletons more broadly. We found that first
saccades were more likely to be directed toward singleton
distractors than toward the average nonsingleton distractor.
This demonstrates that our paradigm is sensitive to
Table 4
Mean saccadic latency (ms) by first saccade landing position for Experiment 3
Target
Nonsingleton Distractor
Singleton Distractor
Singleton Present
216 (20.6)
197 (14.9)
185 (26.3)
Singleton Absent
217 (23.1)
195 (16.8)
–
Note. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.
Table 5
Mean saccadic latency (ms), likelihood of initially fixating the nonsingleton and singleton distractors, and suppression effects for each
saccadic latency quartile in Experiment 3
Quartile
Mean Saccadic Latency
Nonsingleton Distractor
Singleton Distractor
Suppression Effect
Fastest
165
14 %
11 %
3 %
Fast
190
14 %
4 %
10 %
Slow
211
12 %
3 %
9 %
Slowest
256
11 %
3 %
8 %
Note. Suppression effects were calculated as the percentage of saccades landing on the average nonsingleton distractor minus the percentage of saccades
landing on the singleton distractor.
Atten Percept Psychophys


oculomotor capture effects and provides a valid method to
investigate singleton suppression.
Experiment 2 discouraged singleton capture by using a
target that was not a singleton shape and by holding the target
shape constant throughout the entire session. Under these con-
ditions, we found that first saccades were less likely to be
directed toward singleton distractors than toward the average
nonsingleton distractor—an oculomotor singleton suppres-
sion effect. Experiment 3 replicated the findings using modi-
fied parameters that encouraged faster saccadic latencies.
Even though saccadic latencies were significantly faster, first
saccades were still less likely to be directed to singleton
distractors than to nonsingleton distractors.
The rapid disengagement hypothesis
Detailed analyses of the suppression effects in
Experiments 2 and 3 demonstrated that the pattern of re-
sults could not be explained by adding the rapid disen-
gagement hypothesis to the stimulus-driven account. First,
if covert attention had been directed to the color singleton
without an overt eye movement, we should have observed
singleton-presence costs on manual RT. However, no ev-
idence of singleton capture was found in the manual re-
sponse data in Experiments 2 and 3. In fact, participants
demonstrated a marginally significant singleton presence
benefit in Experiment 2 and a significant singleton
presence benefit in Experiment 3, suggesting that the col-
or singleton did not capture covert attention but was ac-
tively suppressed, effectively reducing the relevant set
size of object to be searched.
In addition, the rapid disengagement hypothesis pre-
dicts that color singletons should capture attention on tri-
als with fast saccades. However, even when we
constrained our analyses to the fastest quartile of sac-
cades, first saccades were still less likely to land on sin-
gleton distractors than on nonsingleton distractors. In
Experiment 3, singleton suppression was observed even
in a quartile with a mean saccadic RT of only 165 ms,
demonstrating that suppression can occur very rapidly.
Finally, we computed a continuous measure of gaze posi-
tion at each sample point, ignoring saccades and fixations
altogether, to see if gaze was more likely to be directed to
the region of the singleton early in the trial. We found no
evidence of capture by singletons in the first 200 ms of
stimulus presentation, and after 200 ms singletons were
suppressed. There was no time at which oculomotor cap-
ture was observed. In summary, although dwell times may
sometimes play an important role in the size of observed
capture effects (Fukuda & Vogel, 2011; Gaspelin,
Ruthruff, & Lien, 2016; Geng & Diquattro, 2010;
Theeuwes, 2010; van Zoest et al., 2004), the current sup-
pression effects cannot be attributed to mere rapid
disengagement.
Fig. 7 Gaze position as a function of time relative to stimulus onset in
Experiment 3. An animated plot can be found online as supplementary
material. (a) Scatterplots of current gaze position at selected time points
from trials in which the singleton was 60° counterclockwise from the
target (with the data rotated so that the target appears at the top
position). (b) Data from (a) reformatted as the proportion of gaze
samples in the three object interest regions (target, singleton distractor,
average nonsingleton distractor) at each time point. For simplicity, we
averaged across every singleton angular distance. (Color figure online)
Atten Percept Psychophys


The attentional window hypothesis
Another prominent modification of the stimulus-driven account
is the attentional window hypothesis, which proposes that a
salient stimulus will only capture attention when it appears
inside the current attentional window (Belopolsky &
Theeuwes, 2010; Belopolsky, Zwaan, Theeuwes, Kramer, &
Ramer, 2007; Theeuwes, 2004; but see Gaspelin, Ruthruff,
Lien, & Jung, 2012). According to this hypothesis, participants
will adopt a serial search strategy for difficult search tasks, and
this will yield a small attentional window that does not include
the salient singleton. If participants had adopted a serial search
strategy in our feature search mode experiments, then this could
explain a lack of capture in these experiments. However, this is
not consistent with the overall pattern of results.
If participants had searched serially in the feature search
mode experiments (Experiments 2 and 3), they should have
had a much greater likelihood of fixating a nontarget item
before fixating the target in these experiments than in the
singleton detection mode experiment (Experiment 1).
However, first saccades were approximately equally likely to
be directed to the target under singleton-detection mode in
Experiment 1 (58 %) and under feature-search mode in
Experiment 2 (55 %), which both used identical stimulus tim-
ings. Moreover, if participants had made multiple shifts of
covert attention before fixating the target under feature search
mode, then this would have increased the saccadic latencies
relative to singleton detection mode. However, mean saccade
latencies for trials on which the first saccade landed on the
target on singleton-absent trials were approximately equal in
Experiments 1 and 2 (256 vs. 250 ms, respectively; see
Tables 1 and 2) and were even faster in Experiment 3
(217 ms; see Table 4). Thus, the results provided no evidence
that participants engaged in serial search in Experiments 2 and
3. Overall RT did differ between search modes, but this may
have resulted from a later stage of processing.
In general, most previous research that has used sophisti-
cated approaches to distinguishing between parallel and serial
processing has found that difficult feature search tasks involve
parallel rather than serial processing; this research explains the
increased RTs in difficult search tasks by means of limited-
capacity parallel search (Mordkoff & Yantis, 1993; Townsend,
1971, 1976, 1990) or decision noise (Palmer, 1995; Palmer,
Verghese, & Pavel, 2000). Thus, the attentional window ac-
count will be plausible only for search tasks that clearly re-
quire serial search (see Woodman & Luck, 2003). Moreover,
even if the attentional window was more tightly focused under
feature-search mode, this could explain an elimination of cap-
ture effects, but the attentional window account provides no
means of explaining the observed singleton suppression ef-
fects in first saccades. Without an added suppressive mecha-
nism, the attentional window account provides no reason to
expect below-baseline processing of the color singleton.
Potential mechanisms of suppression
The current experiments suggest that salient feature sin-
gletons can be deprioritized during visual search, which
we call a suppression effect (see also Gaspelin et al.,
2015). Suppression effects can be explained by at least
three possible mechanisms. First, participants may learn
to suppress stimuli directly on the basis of their salience,
which we call a singleton suppression mechanism. For
example, Sawaki and Luck (2010, Experiment 4) varied
target color and singleton color randomly trial by trial in a
visual-search task. Even though participants had no fore-
knowledge of the upcoming singleton feature value, color
singletons elicited an electrophysiological index of sup-
pression, the PD component. This suggests that partici-
pants actively suppressed the singletons based on the fact
that they were color singletons per se, without knowledge
of the specific color of the singleton.
Second, participants may learn to suppress a specific fea-
ture value (e.g., such as red), which we call a featural sup-
pression mechanism (Gaspar & McDonald, 2014; Moher &
Egeth, 2012; Vatterott & Vecera, 2012; Zehetleitner, Goschy,
& Müller, 2012). For example, Vatterott and Vecera (2012)
had participants perform several blocks of an additional sin-
gleton paradigm, with a differently colored singleton on
each block. Participants showed capture effects by the color
singleton in the early portion of a given block, but the cap-
ture effects disappeared by the later portion of the block.
This suggests that participants can learn to suppress a spe-
cific irrelevant feature value. Finally, participants may
preattentively boost features that match the target (which
would exclude the singleton), which is called featural
upweighting (Bichot, Rossi, & Desimone, 2005). Note that
these accounts are not mutually exclusive—participants may
adopt more than one of these strategies at a given moment,
or they may adopt different strategies depending on experi-
ence and task demands. Future research on suppression in
attentional capture should focus on testing between these
alternative accounts.
As far as we know, most tests of the signal suppression
hypothesis have focused solely on one type of salient stimuli:
color singletons (e.g., Gaspar & McDonald, 2014; Gaspelin
et al., 2015; Jannati et al., 2013; Sawaki & Luck, 2010;
Vatterott & Vecera, 2012). However, there is good reason to
suspect that other types of dynamic salient stimuli, such as
suddenly appearing stimuli (abrupt onsets), may be processed
in a fundamentally different manner by the visual system. For
example, several studies have shown that abrupt onsets cap-
ture attention under circumstances where color singletons do
not capture attention (Franconeri & Simons, 2003; Gaspelin
et al., 2012; Jonides & Yantis, 1988). Future research should
test whether other types of salient stimuli, such as abrupt on-
sets, can be actively suppressed.
Atten Percept Psychophys


Conclusions
In summary, the current results extend previous research on
suppression of attentional capture to the field of oculomotor
capture. The signal suppression hypothesis provides a more
compelling account of previous results than either the strict
stimulus-driven or goal-driven hypotheses alone. Future re-
search will be needed to better understand the nature of sup-
pressive attentional control and its temporal dynamics.
Acknowledgments
This study was made possible by NIH Grants
R01MH076226 and R01MH065034 to S.J.L. and postdoctoral fellow-
ships T32EY013587 and F32EY024834 to N.G. from the National Eye
Institute.
Author contributions
N.G., C.J.L., and S.J.L. developed the study
concept and design. Stimulus presentation programming and data analy-
sis were performed by N.G. N.G. drafted the manuscript, and C.J.L. and
S.J.L. provided editorial suggestions. All authors approved of the final
version.
References
Awh, E., Belopolsky, A. V., & Theeuwes, J. (2012). Top-down versus
bottom-up attentional control: A failed theoretical dichotomy.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(8), 437–443.
Bacon, W. F., & Egeth, H. E. (1994). Overriding stimulus-driven atten-
tional capture. Perception & Psychophysics, 55(5), 485–496.
Belopolsky, A. V., & Theeuwes, J. (2010). No capture outside the atten-
tional window. Vision Research, 50(23), 2543–2550.
Belopolsky, A. V., Zwaan, L., Theeuwes, J., Kramer, A. F., & Ramer, A.
R. F. K. (2007). The size of an attentional window modulates atten-
tional capture by color singletons. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
14(5), 934–938.
Bichot, N. P., Rossi, A. F., & Desimone, R. (2005). Parallel and serial
neural mechanisms for visual search in macaque area V4. Science,
308(5721), 529–534.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial Vision, 10(4),
433–436.
Burra, N., & Kerzel, D. (2014). The distractor positivity (Pd) signals
lowering of attentional priority: Evidence from event-related poten-
tials and individual differences. Psychophysiology, 51, 685–696.
Chen, P., & Mordkoff, J. T. (2007). Contingent capture at a very short
SOA: Evidence against rapid disengagement. Visual Cognition,
15(6), 637–646.
Cosman, J. D., & Vecera, S. P. (2013). Learned control over distraction is
disrupted in amnesia. Psychological Science, 24(8), 1585–1590.
Eimer, M., & Kiss, M. (2008). Involuntary attentional capture is deter-
mined by task set: Evidence from event-related brain potentials.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(8), 1423–1433.
Fischer, B., & Breitmeyer, B. (1987). Mechanisms of visual attention re-
vealed by saccadic eye movements. Neuropsychologia, 25(1A), 73–83.
Folk, C. L., & Remington, R. W. (1998). Selectivity in distraction by
irrelevant featural singletons: Evidence for two forms of attentional
capture. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 24(3), 847–858.
Folk, C. L., Remington, R. W., & Johnston, J. C. (1992). Involuntary
covert orienting is contingent on attentional control settings.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 18(4), 1030–1044.
Franconeri, S. L., & Simons, D. J. (2003). Moving and looming stimuli
capture attention. Perception & Psychophysics, 65(7), 999–1010.
Fukuda, K., & Vogel, E. K. (2011). Individual differences in recovery
time from attentional capture. Psychological Science, 22(3), 361–
368.
Gaspar, J. M., Christie, G. J., Prime, D. J., Jolicoeur, P., & McDonald, J.
M. (2016). Inability to suppress salient distractors predicts low vi-
sual working memory capacity. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 113(13),
3693–3698.
Gaspar, J. M., & McDonald, J. J. (2014). Suppression of salient objects
prevents distraction in visual search. The Journal of Neuroscience,
34(16), 5658–5666.
Gaspelin, N., Leonard, C. J., & Luck, S. J. (2015). Direct evidence for
active suppression of salient-but-irrelevant sensory inputs.
Psychological Science, 22(11), 1740–1750.
Gaspelin, N., Margett-Jordan, T., & Ruthruff, E. (2014). Susceptible to
distraction: Children lack top-down control over spatial attention
capture. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 22(2), 461–468.
Gaspelin, N., Ruthruff, E., & Lien, M. (2016). The problem of latent
attentional capture: Easy visual search conceals capture by task-
irrelevant abrupt onsets. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 42(8), 1104–1120.
Gaspelin, N., Ruthruff, E., Lien, M.-C., & Jung, K. (2012). Breaking
through the attentional window: Capture by abrupt onsets versus
color singletons. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 74(7),
1461–1474.
Geng, J. J., & Diquattro, N. E. (2010). Attentional capture by a perceptually
salient non-target facilitates target processing through inhibition and
rapid rejection. Journal of Vision, 10(6), 5. doi:10.1167/10.6.5
Groppe, D., Urbach, T., & Kutas, M. (2011). Mass univariate analysis of
event-related brain potentials/fields: I. A critical tutorial review.
Psychophysiology, 141(4), 520–529.
Henderson, J. M. (2003). Human gaze control during real-world scene
perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(11), 498–504.
doi:10.1016/j.tics.2003.09.006
Hickey, C., Di Lollo, V., & McDonald, J. J. (2009). Electrophysiological
indices of target and distractor processing in visual search. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(4), 760–775.
Hoffman, J. E., & Subramaniam, B. (1995). The role of visual attention in
saccadic eye movements. Perception & Psychophysics, 57(6), 787–
795.
Hutton, S. B., & Ettinger, U. (2006). The antisaccade tas as a research tool
in psychopathology: A critical review. Psychophysiology, 43, 302–
313.
Ipata, A. E., Gee, A. L., Gottlieb, J., Bisley, J. W., & Goldberg, M. E.
(2006). LIP responses to a popout stimulus are reduced if it is overtly
ignored. Nature Neuroscience, 9(8), 1071–1076. doi:10.1038/nn1734
Jannati, A., Gaspar, J. M., & McDonald, J. J. (2013). Tracking target and
distractor processing in fixed-feature visual search: Evidence from
human electrophysiology. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 39(6), 1713–1730.
doi:10.1037/a0032251
Jonides, J., & Yantis, S. (1988). Uniqueness of abrupt visual onset in
capturing attention. Perception & Psychophysics, 43(4), 346–354.
Kim, M.-S., & Cave, K. R. (1995). Spatial attention in visual search for
features and feature conjunctions. Psychological Science, 6(6), 376–
380. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.1995.tb00529.x
Leber, A. B., & Egeth, H. E. (2006). Attention on autopilot: Past experi-
ence and attentional set. Visual Cognition, 14(4/8), 565–583.
Leonard, C. J., & Luck, S. J. (2011). The role of magnocellular signals in
oculomotor attentional capture. Journal of Vision, 11(13), 1534–
7362.
Leonard, C. J., Robinson, B. M., Hahn, B., Gold, J. M., & Luck, S. J.
(2014). Enhanced distraction by magnocellular salience signals in
schizophrenia. Neuropsychologia, 56, 359–366.
Atten Percept Psychophys


Loftus, G. R., & Masson, M. E. J. (1994). Using confidence intervals in
within-subject designs. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1(4), 476–
490.
Maris, E., & Oostenveld, R. (2007). Nonparametric statistical testing of
EEG- and MEG-data. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 164(1),
177–190.
Moher, J., & Egeth, H. E. (2012). The ignoring paradox: Cueing
distractor features leads first to selection, then to inhibition of to-
be-ignored items. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 74(8),
1590–1605.
Moher, J., Lakshmanan, B. M., Egeth, H. E., & Ewen, J. B. (2014).
Inhibition drives early feature-based attention. Psychological
Science, 25(2), 315–324.
Mordkoff, J. T., & Yantis, S. (1993). Dividing attention between color and
shape: Evidence of coactivation. Perception & Psychophysics,
53(4), 357–366.
Mounts, J. R. W. (2000). Attentional capture by abrupt onsets and feature
singletons produces inhibitory surrounds. Perception &
Psychophysics, 62(7), 1485–1493.
Oakes, L. M., Baumgartner, H. A., Barrett, F. S., Messenger, I. M., &
Luck, S. J. (2013). Developmental changes in visual short-term
memory in infancy: Evidence from eye-tracking. Frontiers in
Psychology, 4(Oct.), 1–13.
Palmer, J. (1995). Attention in visual search: Distinguishing four causes
of a set-size effect. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
4(4), 118–123.
Palmer, J., Verghese, P., & Pavel, M. (2000). The psychophysics of visual
search. Vision Research, 40(10/12), 1227–1268.
Reuter-Lorenz, P. A., Hughes, H. C., & Fendrich, R. (1991). The reduc-
tion of saccadic latency by prior offset of the fixation point: An
analysis of the gap effect. Perception & Psychophysics, 49(2),
167–175.
Sawaki, R., & Luck, S. J. (2010). Capture versus suppression of attention
by salient singletons: Electrophysiological evidence for an automat-
ic attend-to-me signal. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics,
72(6), 1455–1470.
Sawaki, R., & Luck, S. J. (2011). Active suppression of distractors that
match the contents of visual working memory. Visual Cognition,
19(7), 956–972.
Theeuwes, J. (1992). Perceptual selectivity for color and form. Perception
& Psychophysics, 51(6), 599–606.
Theeuwes, J. (2004). Top-down search strategies cannot override atten-
tional capture. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11(1), 65–70.
Theeuwes, J. (2010). Top-down and bottom-up control of visual selec-
tion. Acta Psychologica, 135(2), 77–99.
Theeuwes, J., Atchley, P., & Kramer, A. F. (2000). On the time course of
top-down and bottom-up control of visual attention. Control of
Cognitive Processes: Attention and Performance, XVIII, 105–124.
Theeuwes, J., De Vries, G.-J., & Godijn, R. (2003). Attentional and oc-
ulomotor capture with static singletons. Perception &
Psychophysics, 65(5), 735–746.
Theeuwes, J., Kramer, A. F., Hahn, S., & Irwin, D. E. (1998). Our eyes do
not always go where we want them to go: Capture of the eyes by
new objects. Psychological Science, 9(5), 379–385.
Theeuwes, J., Kramer, A. F., Hahn, S., Irwin, D. E., & Zelinsky, G. J.
(1999). Influence of attentional capture on oculomotor control.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 25(6), 1595–1608.
Townsend, J. T. (1971). A note on the identifiability of parallel and serial
processes. Perception & Psychophysics, 10(3), 161–163.
Townsend, J. T. (1976). Serial and within-stage independent parallel
model equivalence on the minimum completion time. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 14(3), 219–238.
Townsend, J. T. (1990). Serial vs. parallel processing: Sometimes they
look like Tweedledum and Tweedledee but they can (and should) be
distinguished. Psychological Science, 1(1), 46–54.
van Zoest, W., Donk, M., & Theeuwes, J. (2004). The role of stimulus-
driven and goal-driven control in saccadic visual selection. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
30(4), 746–759.
Vatterott, D. B., & Vecera, S. P. (2012). Experience-dependent attentional
tuning of distractor rejection. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
19(5), 871–878.
Wolfe, J. M. (2007). Guided Search 4.0: Current progress with a model of
visual search. In W. D. Gray (Ed.), Integrated models of cognitive
systems (pp. 99–119). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Wolfe, J. M., Cave, K. R., & Franzel, S. L. (1989). Guided Search: An
alternative to the feature integration model for visual search. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
15(3), 419–433.
Woodman, G. F., & Luck, S. J. (2003). Serial deployment of attention
during visual search. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human
Perception and Performance, 29(1), 121–138.
Wu, S., & Remington, R. W. (2003). Characteristics of covert and overt
visual orienting: Evidence from attentional and oculomotor capture.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 29(5), 1050–1067.
Zehetleitner, M., Goschy, H., & Müller, H. J. (2012). Top-down control of
attention: It’s gradual, practice-dependent, and hierarchically orga-
nized. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 38(4), 941–957.
Atten Percept Psychophys


