Behavioral/Systems/Cognitive
Human Variation in Overriding Attentional Capture
Keisuke Fukuda and Edward K. Vogel
Department of Psychology, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403-1227
Attention can be directed either voluntarily based on the goals of the individual or involuntarily “captured” by salient stimuli in the
immediate environment. Although involuntary capture is a critical means of directing attention, the completion of many common tasks
requiresourabilitytoignoresalient,butotherwiseirrelevantstimuliwhilerestrictingourattentiontostimulithatarerelatedtoourgoals.
Here,wereportneurophysiologicalmeasuresofspatialattentioninhumansthatgaugeanindividual’sabilitytoresistattentionalcapture
from salient but irrelevant information. By measuring the rapid reallocation of spatial attention immediately after the onset of distrac-
tors, we observe that the ability to override attentional capture varies substantially across individuals and is strongly predicted by the
specific working memory capacity of each person. High-capacity individuals were much more capable of resisting attentional capture
than low-capacity individuals, who involuntarily reallocated spatial attention when distractors were present in the display. These results
provide evidence that the poor attentional abilities associated with low memory capacity may stem from an inability to override atten-
tional capture in the initial moments after the onset of distracting information.
Introduction
Attention depends on two primary modes that compete for con-
trol over what information from the environment will be selec-
tively enhanced or ignored. Attention can be shifted voluntarily
to locations or objects to satisfy the individual’s goals, and this is
thought to be driven by “top-down” signals in prefrontal cortex
that bias processing in posterior cortical areas (Desimone and
Duncan, 1995; Miller and Cohen, 2001). In contrast, attention
can be involuntarily captured by stimuli possessing highly salient
properties (e.g., ambulance siren), despite being irrelevant to the
individual’s current goals, and this is thought to depend on
“bottom-up” signals from both subcortical structures (e.g., lat-
eral geniculate nucleus) as well as visual cortex (Yantis and
Jonides, 1990; Yantis, 2000; O’Connor et al., 2002). Although
recent work has begun to establish how these two modes com-
municate (Buschman and Miller, 2007), the means by which they
compete for the control of attention are still poorly understood.
Although involuntary attentional capture is an ecologically critical
mechanism for detecting potentially important stimuli in the envi-
ronment(BreitmeyerandGanz,1976),itoftencomesattheexpense
of goal-driven behavior (Posner, 1980; Berger et al., 2005). Indeed,
manycognitivetasksrequiretheabilitytoignoresignalsfromsalient
butirrelevantstimulisothatwemayrestrictattentiontostimulithat
are related to our goals (Kane and Engle, 2003). Thus, how effective
an individual is at overriding attentional capture may be a critical
factor in that individual’s ability to achieve task-related goals.
Humans vary considerably in their ability to perform many
cognitive tasks. One important source of this variance is an indi-
vidual’s working memory capacity (Cowan, 2001; Vogel and
Awh, 2008). Numerous cognitive systems are thought to use
working memory as an online “workspace” for representing task-
relevant information. Because of its central role in cognition,
individual differences in working memory capacity have been
shown to be highly predictive of performance across a wide range
of high-level aptitude measures, such as fluid intelligence (Kyl-
lonen and Christal, 1990; Cowan et al., 2005). Moreover, recent
work has suggested that various attentional abilities also covary
with working memory capacity: high-capacity individuals show
enhanced performance on attention tasks such compared with
low-capacity individuals (Kane et al., 2001; Bleckley et al., 2003;
Sobel et al., 2007). For example, Vogel et al. (2005) observed that
low-capacity individuals were poorer at controlling which items
from a display would be stored in visual working memory (WM)
than high-capacity individuals. McNab and Klingberg (2008) ex-
tended these findings by observing that the control signals gov-
erning access to WM may emanate from preparatory activity in
the prefrontal cortex and the basal ganglia, and that these signals
are less robust in low-capacity individuals, resulting in irrelevant
items unnecessarily entering the capacity-limited WM storage of
the intraparietal sulcus (Todd and Marois, 2004; Xu and Chun,
2006). However, one fundamental ambiguity remains in under-
standing the relationship between memory capacity and atten-
tion: is poor attentional performance by low-capacity individuals
the result of weak top-down control signals for selecting task-
relevant items, or is it the result of an inability to override strong
involuntary attentional capture signals from irrelevant items?
Here, we tested between these two alternatives by measuring each
subject’s working memory capacity and examining its relation-
ship with the effectiveness of their voluntary attention and their
ability to resist attentional capture.
Materials and Methods
Overview
To examine how effectively individuals could override attentional cap-
ture, we recorded event-related potentials (ERPs) from healthy young
Received May 6, 2009; revised May 19, 2009; accepted May 30, 2009.
This study was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation to E.K.V.
Correspondence should be addressed to Edward K. Vogel, Department of Psychology, University of Oregon,
Eugene, OR 97403-1227. E-mail: vogel@uoregon.edu.
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2145-09.2009
Copyright © 2009 Society for Neuroscience
0270-6474/09/298726-08$15.00/0
8726 • The Journal of Neuroscience, July 8, 2009 • 29(27):8726–8733


adults while they performed a spatial attention task in which it was nec-
essary to report the identity of a target presented at a cued location. On
each trial, they were presented with a 100 ms bilateral display of Landolt
“C”s and were asked to report the orientation of only the one item pre-
sented in the location that was indicated by a spatially informative cue at
the beginning of the trial (Fig. 1A). The target was always presented along
with three distractor items that were similar to the target at nearby loca-
tions, such that the four items together formed a diamond configuration
in the hemifield. On half of the trials, 50 ms after the target array disap-
peared, a bilateral task-irrelevant probe (i.e., a
filled white square) was flashed either at the
location of the target for that trial or at the
location of one of the distractors. On the
other half of trials, no probe stimulus was
presented. At the end of all trials, subjects
reported the orientation of the target item by
pressing one of four buttons.
Participants
All participants gave informed consent after the
procedures of a protocol approved by the Hu-
man Subjects Committee at the University of
Oregon. All subjects were members of the Uni-
versity of Oregon community and were paid
$10 per hour for participation. A unique set of
subjects participated in each experiment with
20 in experiment 1, 20 in experiment 2, 16 in
experiment 3, and 28 in experiment 4. Subjects
with eye-blink or eye-movement artifacts in ex-
cess of 25% of trials were excluded from further
analysis. Four subjects in experiment 1, four
subjects in experiment 2, and one subject in ex-
periment 3 exceeded this threshold.
Measuring visual working
memory capacity
For each experiment, participants first com-
pleted a behavior-only visual working memory
task before starting the ERP experiment. The
working memory task consisted of a change de-
tection task with arrays of 4, 6, and 8 colored
squares with a 1 s retention interval (Luck and
Vogel, 1997; Vogel et al., 2001). We computed
each individual’s visual memory capacity with a
standard
formula
(Pashler,
1988;
Cowan,
2001). The formula is K  S(H F), where K is
the memory capacity, S is the size of the array, H
is the observed hit rate, and F is the false alarm
rate. Subjects were divided into high-capacity
and low-capacity groups using a median split of
their memory capacity estimates.
Electroencephalography recording
ERPs were recorded in each experiment using
our standard recording and analysis procedures
(McCollough et al., 2007), including rejection
of trials contaminated by blinks or large (1°)
eye movements. We recorded from 22 standard
electrode sites spanning the scalp, including in-
ternational 10/20 sites F3, F4, C3, C4, P3, P4,
O1, O2, PO3, PO4, T5, T6, as well as nonstand-
ard sites occipital left (OL) and occipital right
(OR) (midway between O1/2 and T5/6). The
horizontal electrooculogram (EOG) was re-
corded from electrodes placed 1 cm to the left
and right of the external canthi to measure hor-
izontal eye movement, and the vertical EOG
was recorded from an electrode beneath the
right eye referenced to the left mastoid to detect
blinks and vertical eye movements. Trails containing ocular artifacts,
movement artifacts, or amplifier saturation were excluded from the av-
eraged ERP waveforms. Furthermore, participants who had 20% of
trial rejections in any condition were excluded from the analysis. The
electroencephalography and EOG were amplified by an SA Instrumen-
tation amplifier with a bandpass of 0.01–80 Hz (half-power cutoff, But-
terworth filters) and were digitized at 250 Hz by a personal computer
compatible microcomputer.
Figure1.
Stimuliandresultsfromexperiment1.A,Exampleofthestimulussequenceandthreeprobeconditions.Thecolored
cueindicatedthelocationofthetargetitemforthetrial.Halfofthesubjectsattendedredcues,andtheotherhalfattendedgreen
cues.B,GrandaveragedERPwaveformstime-lockedtotheonsetofthetargetarrayaveragedacrosslateraloccipitalandtemporal
electrode sites and divided between the high- and low-memory-capacity groups. Note that, by convention, negative voltage is
plottedupward.C,ERPdifferencewaves(contralateralminusipsilateral)time-lockedtothetargetarray.D,Correlationbetween
an individual’s memory capacity and the magnitude of the P1/N1 voluntary attention effect in microvolts.
Fukuda and Vogel • WM and Attentional Capture
J. Neurosci., July 8, 2009 • 29(27):8726–8733 • 8727


Stimuli and procedure for experiments 1 and 2
Cued target identification task
Cue and target array. Each trial started with the onset of fixation cross
(0.5°  0.5°) centered on a gray background (red, green, blue  125, 125,
125). Subjects were instructed to hold central fixation throughout the
trial. Two hundred milliseconds later, a cue array containing two
diamond-like shapes (1.6°  1.6° for each diamond) with a green and a
red dot (0.3°  0.3°) on each was presented for 500 ms. The four corners
of each diamond represented the four possible target locations in each
corresponding hemifield. Half of the participants were instructed that
the position of a green dot indicates where the target item will be pre-
sented in target array. The other half of the participants were instructed
that the position of the red indicates the target location. After the offset of
the cue (200 ms), we presented a target array composed of four boxes
with a gap on a side (box size, 1°  1°; gap size, 0.3°) for 50 ms, and
participants were asked to press a button to report where the gap was on
the target box. Subjects performed a total of 1200 trials (400 in each
condition).
Experiment 2 used an identical procedure with two notable excep-
tions. First, the target array included either three similar distractors (as in
experiment 1), no distractors, or four dissimilar distractors in the same
hemifield with the target. The dissimilar distractors were blue circles
(radius, 1°) that were presented at locations directly adjacent to the po-
tential target positions. Second, for the no distractor and dissimilar dis-
tractor conditions, we made the size of the gap in the target item smaller
(gap size, 0.15°), so that we could equate the discrimination difficulty
between these conditions and the dissimilar distractor condition.
Probe array. After the offset of target array (50 ms), on two-thirds of
trials, task irrelevant bilateral probes (white squares, 0.9°  0.9°) were
presented for 50 ms at either the target location or one of the distractor
locations with equal probability. No probe was presented on the other
one-third of trials to obtain an ERP response elicited exclusively by the
target array.
ERP analyses
Voluntary attention (time locking to target array). Only the probe-absent
trials were analyzed to establish a pure measure of the ERP components
evoked by the target array without subsequent overlap from the evoked
activity to the probe. The amplitude of P1/N1 attentional modulation
was measured as the difference in mean amplitude between contralateral
activity and ipsilateral activity from 75 to 175 ms after the onset of target
array. We computed contralateral waveforms by averaging the activity
recorded at right hemisphere electrode sites when subjects were cued to
attend the left hemifield with the activity recorded from left hemisphere
electrode sites when they were cued to attend the right hemifield. P1/N1
attention effects were measured by averaging across four posterior pairs
of lateral electrode sites (PO3, PO4, OL, OR, T5, and T6). Mean ampli-
tudes were compared across conditions by repeated-measures ANOVA.
Resistance to attentional capture (time locking to probe array). To elim-
inate the overlapping activity evoked by the target array from that evoked
by the probe itself, we computed a difference wave between probe-
present trials and probe-absent trials. The logic of this approach is that
overlapping activity from the target array would be equivalent for both
probe-present and probe-absent trials and thus would be eliminated in
the subtraction leaving only the evoked response to the probe. The am-
plitude of P1/N1 attentional modulation to the probe was measured as
the difference in mean amplitude between contralateral activity and ip-
silateral activity from 75 to 175 ms after the onset of probe array. The
measurements of P1/N1 were obtained by averaging across four poste-
rior pairs of lateral electrode sites (PO3, PO4, OL, OR, T5, and T6).
Stimuli and procedure for experiment 3
Working memory filtering task
At the beginning of each trial, an arrow cue is presented above the fixa-
tion cross for 200 ms to indicate which side of the screen (left/right) to
perform the task while ignoring the other hemifield. After the offset of
cue array (500 ms), the memory array was presented for 150 ms. In the
distractors-absent conditions, the memory array contained either two
squares (square size, 1°  1°) (T2D0) or six squares (T6D0) in each
hemifield. In the distractors-present condition, the memory array con-
sisted of two squares and four very square-like rectangles (width to height
ratio, 2/3:3/2) (T2D4). After 900 ms of blank screen (retention interval),
a test array was presented with one colored square in each hemifield. The
subjects were asked to make an unspeeded response as to whether the
colored square was either the same or different to its original value in the
memory array. On two-thirds of distractor-present trials, two task-
irrelevant probes were presented 50 ms after the offset of memory array
in each hemifield. On half of these trials, the probes were presented at
target locations, and on the other half of the trials, the probes were
presented at distractor locations. Each participant completed 200 trials
for each distractor-absent condition (T2D0 and T6D0) and 300 trials for
each distractor-present condition (T2D4 no probe, T2D4 target probe,
and T2D4 distractor probe).
ERP analyses
Contralateral delay activity. The contralateral delay activity (CDA) was
measured as the difference in mean amplitude between ipsilateral and
contralateral waveforms recorded at posterior parietal, lateral occipital,
and posterior temporal electrode sites (PO3, PO4, T5, T6, OL, and OR)
from 300–900 ms after the onset of the memory array. The amplitude of
the CDA was measured on probe-absent trials only to avoid any ERP
overlap from the probe onset. The unnecessary storage effect was mea-
sured as the mean difference in CDA amplitude between the two target
distractor present trials (T2D4) and the two target distractor absent trials
(T2D0).
Resistance to attentional capture—P1/N1 attentional modulation. At-
tentional responses to the probe in experiment 3 were measured using
the same procedure as that in the first two experiments.
Stimuli and procedure for experiment 4 (spatial blink test)
This task was a modified version of the original spatial blink task intro-
duced in Folk et al. (2002). Participants observed a rapid serial stream
(RSVP) of colored letters presented at fixation, and their goal was to
identify a single letter drawn in a target color within the stream. Target
color was red for half of participants and green for the other half of
subjects, counterbalanced. In each RSVP stream, each letter was pre-
sented for 45 ms and followed by 45 ms of blank screen. All the letters
except for Q, R, P, I, and O were used to create a stream with 15 letters
without repetition. For red target participants, all distractor letters were
randomly assigned to four possible isoluminant distractor colors (blue,
yellow, magenta, and green), and for green target participants, red was
used as one of the distractor colors. On half of the trials, four “#” signs
were presented simultaneously around the fixation cross (figure X) at
either lag 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 before the target letter (flanker condition). For
half of these flanker-present trials, one of the flanking “#” signs was
assigned with one of the distractor colors (irrelevant color flanker); for
the other half of trials, it was assigned a target color (relevant color
flanker). The remaining three “#” signs were gray. Overall, each partici-
pant completed 960 RSVP trials.
Results
To measure spatial attention, we examined the early visually
evoked ERP waveforms (i.e., P1 and N1) that reflect sensory pro-
cessing in extrastriate cortical areas beginning within the first 75
ms of stimulus onset. These ERP components are modulated by
spatial attention, with larger amplitudes observed for stimuli that
appear in attended locations compared with reduced amplitudes
for stimuli presented in unattended locations (Mangun et al.,
1993; Hillyard et al., 1998). In lateralized displays, such as those
used here, the P1 attention effect is typically observed as a larger
positive voltage at electrodes over the hemisphere that is con-
tralateral to the attended side of the display; whereas the N1 at-
tention effect is often observed as a larger negative voltage at
electrodes over the hemisphere that is ipsilateral to the attended
sided of the display (Heinze et al., 1990). Thus, these ERP com-
8728 • J. Neurosci., July 8, 2009 • 29(27):8726–8733
Fukuda and Vogel • WM and Attentional Capture


ponents provide a sensitive measure of where spatial attention is
directed at a particular moment during a task.
Measuring voluntary and involuntary attention
We measured both voluntary and involuntary control mecha-
nisms by examining the spatial attention during two separate
moments of task performance. By examining the P1/N1 attention
effect to the target array, we could measure how effectively an
individual could interpret the cue, voluntarily orient attention
toward the impending target location, and modulate the percep-
tual response to the display. In contrast, the P1/N1 response to
the task-irrelevant probe that followed the target array provides a
measure of whether the individual could override attentional
capture by the distractors. For example, imagine an individual
that could completely resist attentional capture from the distrac-
tors surrounding the target by locking attention exclusively to the
target position. When the task-irrelevant probe appears at the
target location, there should be a large P1/N1 response, because
that location is still attended; however, when the probe is pre-
sented at distractor position, a negligible P1/N1 response is ex-
pected, because attention is focused solely on the target location.
Thus, perfect override of attentional capture would produce a
steep gradient in the P1/N1 responses between probes presented
at target and distractor locations. In contrast, consider an indi-
vidual who was incapable of resisting attentional capture by the
distractors surrounding the target and involuntarily reoriented
attention to include one or more of the distractor locations.
When the probe is presented at the target location, the P1/N1
response may be reduced, because atten-
tion has been withdrawn from the target
location; however, probes presented at the
distractor location may show an increased
P1/N1 response, because one or more of
these locations is now attended. Thus, a
perfect inability to override capture would
produce a small difference in the P1/N1
responses to probes presented at target
and distractor locations. Consequently, by
measuring the difference in the response
to probes at target and distractor locations,
we can gauge an individual’s effectiveness
at
overriding
involuntary
attentional
capture.
Both groups showed large and signifi-
cant early attention effects to the target ar-
ray (Fig. 1B). However, the magnitude of
this effect was not different between the
groups [F 1, nonsignificant (n.s.)]. Thus,
we observe no relationship between how
well one can voluntarily orient attention in
this task and his or her memory capacity
(r  0.11, n.s.). However, by examining
the response to the probe, such a relation-
ship emerges (Fig. 2). High-capacity indi-
viduals showed a large attention effect for
probes at target locations ( p  0.001) and
a small, nonsignificant effect for probes at
distractor positions ( p  0.25), consistent
with an ability to hold attention exclu-
sively at the target position. In contrast,
the low-capacity individuals showed a
considerably smaller attention effect for
probes at target positions ( p  0.01), and
the magnitude of this effect was not reliably greater than the
attention effect observed for probes at distractor positions ( p 
0.30): consistent with an inability to maintain focus on the target
location and a reorienting of attention to include distractor po-
sitions. We calculated the difference in amplitude between probe
responses at target locations and those at distractor locations and
plotted this value for each subject as a function of his or her
working memory capacity (Fig. 2C). We observed a highly signif-
icant positive correlation between these two factors (r  0.73, p 
0.001), with low-capacity individuals showing poor resistance to
attentional capture and high-capacity individuals showing strong
resistance to capture.
Experiment 2: capture by any distracting items or only
similar distractors?
The results of experiment 1 suggest that although voluntary at-
tention ability does not vary with memory capacity, the ability to
override attentional capture signals from distractors does
strongly correlate with memory capacity. However, it is unclear
whether low-capacity subjects involuntarily reorient spatial at-
tention when any distracting items are present or if it is restricted
only to distractors that are similar to the target (Folk et al., 1992;
Theeuwes, 1994)? Therefore, in experiment 2, we manipulated
the similarity of the distractors to the target by presenting either
no distractors, similar distractors (as in experiment 1), or highly
dissimilar distractors (i.e., blue circles). If low-capacity individu-
als reorient spatial attention for any distracting material regard-
less of its similarity to the target, we would expect equivalent
Figure 2.
Attention responses to the probe in experiment 1. A, ERP difference waves (contralateral minus ipsilateral) time-
lockedtotheonsetoftheprobedividedacrosshigh-andlow-memory-capacitygroups.B,Meanamplitude(inmicrovolts)ofthe
P1/N1 attention effect to the probe. Error bars reflect 95% confidence intervals. C, Correlation between memory capacity and
susceptibility to attentional capture. Attentional capture is measured as the amplitude difference (in microvolts) between the
P1/N1 responses to probes at target and distractor locations. Note that smaller values indicate poorer resistance to capture.
Fukuda and Vogel • WM and Attentional Capture
J. Neurosci., July 8, 2009 • 29(27):8726–8733 • 8729


capture effects for the dissimilar and simi-
lar distractor conditions. However, if the
low-capacity subject’s difficulties in over-
riding attentional capture occur only
when the distractors share visual features
with the target, we should observe the re-
lationship with memory capacity only in
the similar distractor condition. Figure 3
shows the relationship between memory
capacity and the distractor capture atten-
tion effect to the probe across the three
conditions. When the distractors were
similar to the target, we replicated the
strong correlation with memory capacity
that was observed in experiment 1 (r 
0.64, p  0.001). However, this relation-
ship was not observed for trials with either
no distractors (r  0.15, n.s.) or dissimilar
distractors (r  0.14, n.s.), which indicates
that this relationship is restricted to cap-
ture triggered by the presence distractors
that are highly similar to the target.
Behavioral performance for
experiments 1 and 2
Working memory task
The mean working memory capacity estimates were 2.6 (SD,
0.78) and 2.9 (SD, 0.80), for experiment 1 and experiment 2,
respectively. Across the two experiments, working memory ca-
pacity estimates ranged from 1.2 to 4.2.
Cued target task
In experiment 1, the mean accuracy was 94% (SD, 0.05) for no
probe condition, 90% (SD, 0.07) for the target probe condition,
and 94% (SD, 0.05) for the distractor probe condition. A
repeated-measure ANOVA showed a significant difference in ac-
curacy between the target probe condition and the other two
conditions (F(1,14)  19.68, p  0.01). There was no significant
difference between the distractor probe and no probe condition
(F(1,14)  0.11, p  0.7). The result indicates that a probe at the
target location made the task slightly harder than a probe at a
distractor location or no probe. However, individual differences
in working memory capacity were not predictive of performance
in any condition ( p values  0.25).
In experiment 2, when there were no distractors present,
mean accuracy was 91% (SD, 0.07) for no probe condition, 89%
(SD, 0.08) for the target probe condition, and 89% (SD, 0.08) for
the distractor-position probe condition. Repeated-measure
ANOVA showed a small but significant difference in accuracy
between no probe condition and probe conditions (F(1,13) 
11.43, p  0.01) but no significant difference between the two
probe conditions (F(1,13)  3.29, p  0.05). Similar to experiment
1, individual working memory capacity was not predictive of
performance in any condition ( p values  0.05).
In the similar distractor conditions, the mean accuracy was
84% (SD, 0.11) for no probe condition, 68% (SD, 0.14) for the
target probe condition, and 82% (SD, 0.13) for the distractor
probe condition. A repeated-measure ANOVA showed a signifi-
cant difference in accuracy between no probe condition and two
probe conditions (F(1,15)  54.96, p  0.01). There was also a
significant difference between the two probe conditions (F(1,15) 
32.38, p  0.01) with lower accuracy for the target probe trials.
Similar to previous experiments, individual working memory ca-
pacity was not predictive of performance in any condition ( p
values  0.05).
In dissimilar distractor conditions, the mean accuracy re-
vealed a similar pattern as the similar distractor conditions [no
probe condition  83% (SD, 0.08), target probe condition 
71% (SD, 0.10), distractor probe condition  81% (SD, 0.09)]. A
repeated-measure ANOVA showed a significant difference in ac-
curacy between no probe conditions and probe conditions
(F(1,15)  66.49, p  0.01). There was also a significant difference
between distractor probe and target probe conditions (F(1,15) 
36.79, p  0.01). Similar to previous experiments, individual
working memory capacity was not predictive of performance in
any condition ( p values  0.05).
One interesting result from experiment 2 was that high-
capacity individuals showed a larger cost in performance, attrib-
utable to the presence of a probe at the target location (r  0.49,
p  0.05). This suggests that high-capacity individuals were more
susceptible to the masking effect by the probe. Such relationship
between the probe-induced masking effect and working memory
capacity was only observed in the similar distractor condition,
which supports the idea that high-capacity individuals had
tighter focus of attention on the target location and thus incurred
more cost because of the probe flash.
Experiment 3: capture as an early mechanism for unnecessary
storage in WM?
It is unclear whether this involuntary reorienting toward distrac-
tors by low-capacity subjects at early processing stages incurs
significant consequences at later stages of processing or whether
these distractors are briefly attended but then quickly disregarded
before they are processed further. We examined this question in
experiment 3 by asking subjects to perform a visual WM task in
which they must selectively remember the colors of only the
squares in a display that also contained colored rectangles (Fig.
4A). Similar to the previous experiments, we flashed task-
irrelevant probes either at the target or the distractor locations
within the attended hemifield shortly after the memory array so
Figure 3.
Stimulus displays and results from experiment 2. A, Top, Example of a similar distractors trial. Bottom, Correlation
between memory capacity and susceptibility to attentional capture with similar distractors. B, Top, Example of a no distractors
trial. Bottom, Correlation between memory capacity and susceptibility to capture with no distractors. C, Top, Example of a
dissimilardistractorstrial.Bottom,Correlationbetweenmemorycapacityandsusceptibilitytocapturewithdissimilardistractors.
8730 • J. Neurosci., July 8, 2009 • 29(27):8726–8733
Fukuda and Vogel • WM and Attentional Capture


that we could examine the early attentional capture effect. Addi-
tionally, we examined the CDA during the memory retention
period, which has been shown to be sensitive to the number of
items that are currently being maintained in visual working
memory (Vogel and Machizawa, 2004; McCollough et al., 2007).
We used the CDA as a measure of whether or not the irrelevant
items (i.e., the rectangles) were unnecessarily maintained in vi-
sual working memory by comparing CDA amplitude on trials
containing two targets and no distractors with trials containing
two targets and four distractors. Efficient exclusion of the distrac-
tors from memory would result in equivalent CDA amplitudes
between the conditions, whereas an inability to exclude the dis-
tractors would result in larger CDA amplitudes for the distractor
present conditions than the target only conditions. Here, we ex-
amined whether an individual’s ability to resist attentional cap-
ture during the initial moments of processing (i.e., P1/N1) pre-
dicts whether that individual ultimately stores the irrelevant
items in memory. As before, we again observed a strong correla-
tion between the early attentional capture effect and memory
capacity (r  0.67, p  0.001) (Fig. 4B). Moreover, we replicated
our previous finding of a strong correlation between unnecessary
storage of distractors and memory capacity (r  0.71, p  0.001)
(Fig. 4C). Importantly, we found a strong correlation between an
individual’s P1/N1 capture effect and the CDA irrelevant mem-
ory storage effect (r  0.55, p  0.01) (Fig. 4D), with individuals
who were more prone to attentional capture showing larger un-
necessary storage effects in memory. Although we cannot con-
clude causality, these results indicate how well an individual can
override attentional capture within the
first 100 ms of processing predicts whether
or not irrelevant items are unnecessarily
stored in working memory.
Behavioral performance for
experiment 3
Working memory task
The mean working memory capacity esti-
mate was 2.64 (SD, 0.88). The range in the
estimate was 1.3–4.5.
Filtering task
The mean accuracy for T2D0 condition
was 89.3% (SD, 7.2%). The mean accuracy
for T2D4 condition was 65.1% (SD,
10.1%). Filtering cost was calculated as the
decline in accuracy from T2D0 condition
to T2D4 condition (mean, 24.2%; SD,
8.3%).
There was a significant negative corre-
lation between individuals’ working mem-
ory capacity and the filtering cost (r 
0.63, p  0.01). This shows that lower
working memory capacity individuals suf-
fered more by the presence of distractors
than high-capacity subjects.
Moreover, the behavioral filtering cost
showed a strong relationship with ERP
measures of unnecessary storage as well as
involuntary attentional capture. First, it
showed a negative correlation with the in-
crease in CDA amplitude because of dis-
tractors (r  0.77, p  0.01). This nicely
demonstrates that the behavioral measure
of filtering cost is reflecting the conse-
quence of storing irrelevant objects as measured by the CDA.
Furthermore, behavioral filtering cost negatively correlated with
the difference between P1/N1 attentional responses to target
probes and distractor probes (r  0.71, p  0.05). This is in line
with the ERP finding that the involuntary attentional capture by
similar distractors led to inefficient filtering.
Experiment 4: do these relationships generalize to other
capture paradigms?
In the final experiment, we sought to determine whether the
results of the first three experiments generalize to other standard
behavioral measures of attentional capture. In particular, we used
a “spatial blink” task (Folk et al., 2002) in which subjects must
report the identity of a single target letter drawn in red which is
embedded in a rapid serial stream of colored letters (Fig. 5A). On
a portion of trials shortly before the target appeared, task-
irrelevant “#” signs flanked the target stream as a means of tem-
porarily capturing attention away from stream, resulting in re-
duced accuracy for reporting the target (Fig. 5B). These flanker
trials contained either a single red “#” (contingent color flanker,
i.e., the same as the target) or a single blue “#” (irrelevant color
flanker). Consequently, this task provides three measures of at-
tentional control for each subject. By examining performance on
no-flanker trials, we can assess how effectively each subject could
voluntarily orient attention to the target stream and select the
target. Despite the very challenging task (mean accuracy was
78%), high- and low-memory-capacity individuals performed
Figure4.
Stimuliandresultsfromexperiment3.A,Exampleofaselectiveworkingmemorytrialwithdistractorspresentforthe
lefthemifield.Subjectsmustrememberthecolorsofonlythesquaresacrosstheretentionperiod.B,Correlationbetweenmemory
capacity and susceptibility to attentional capture for distractor present trials. C, Correlation between memory capacity and the
unnecessarystorageeffectduringtheretentionperiod.Unnecessarystoragewasmeasuredasthedifferenceinmeanamplitude
(in microvolts) of the CDA component between the distractors present and distractors absent trials at the lateral occipital and
posteriorparietalelectrodesites.Notethatmorenegativevaluesindicategreateramountsofunnecessarystorageinmemory.D,
Correlation between susceptibility to attentional capture during encoding and unnecessary storage of distractors during the
retention period.
Fukuda and Vogel • WM and Attentional Capture
J. Neurosci., July 8, 2009 • 29(27):8726–8733 • 8731


equivalently (F 1). Furthermore, on ir-
relevant color flanker trials, target accu-
racy was reduced significantly, but again,
no relationship to memory capacity was
observed (r  0.14, n.s.). However, on
contingent color flanker trials, target accu-
racy was again reduced, but here the mag-
nitude of the capture effect was strongly
correlated with memory capacity (Fig. 5C)
(r  0.52, p  0.01), with low-capacity
individuals showing the largest reduction
in performance. This pattern of results
converges nicely with those in the first
three experiments. Specifically, although
voluntary attention appears to be unaf-
fected, low-memory-capacity individuals
are substantially impaired at resisting at-
tentional capture from distractors that
share features with the current target.
Behavioral performance for experiment 4
Working memory task
Individual working memory capacity estimate (mean, 2.9; SD,
0.8) ranged from 1.4 to 4.5.
Spatial blink task
At the group level, we successfully replicated the primary result of
Folk et al. (2002). We observed that target identification accuracy
is significantly lower when flankers appeared shortly before the
target onset. First of all, when there was no flanker presented
along with the RSVP stream, mean accuracy was 78% (SD, 11%).
When one of the flankers had an irrelevant color, accuracy was
significantly lower ( p  0.01) at Lag 2 [180 ms stimulus onset
asynchrony (SOA)]. When one of the flankers shared a target
color, the drop was significant across Lag 0 (0 ms SOA) through
Lag 5 (450 ms SOA) (p values 0.03). This suggests attentional
capture was larger and lasted longer when a flanker shared color
value with the target.
Discussion
The ability to override the involuntary capture of attention by
salient but irrelevant information is an important determinant
for the successful completion of many goal-directed behaviors.
By using a novel neural measure of attentional capture, our re-
sults reveal that there is systematic variability across human indi-
viduals in the ability to override the capture signal from distrac-
tors and lock spatial attention on target locations. More
importantly, these results help to resolve the question of why
low-capacity individuals often have poor performance on various
types of attention tasks. That is, our observation that the volun-
tary P1/N1 attention effects to the target array were large, reliable,
and entirely uncorrelated with memory capacity indicates that
the low-capacity individuals were unimpaired in their ability to
consistently follow the goal-based instructions of the task and
could voluntarily orient their spatial attention just as effectively
as their high-capacity counterparts. Instead, these results suggest
that the poor attentional ability associated with low memory ca-
pacity is a consequence of a deficit in adequately overriding in-
voluntary attentional capture signals from distracting informa-
tion. Poor override of attentional capture led to a rapid and
involuntary reorienting of spatial attention toward the locations
of the distractors which likely resulted in their unnecessary stor-
age in WM. Thus, a surprising secondary conclusion from these
results is that the poor attentional ability of low-capacity subjects
appears to stem from the allocation of attention within the initial
moments after the onset of distracting information, a time course
that is much earlier in processing than has been previously as-
sumed on the basis of various late-stage tasks such as Stroop
(Kane and Engle, 2003), anti-saccade (Unsworth et al., 2004), and
partial report (Vogel et al., 2005).
We observed the relationship between memory capacity and
attentional capture only in situations when the identity of the
distractors was highly similar to the target, which is inconsistent
with a purely “stimulus-driven” (Theeuwes, 1994) form of atten-
tional capture. That is, because information regarding the indi-
vidual’s goals (e.g., target identity) influenced whether the dis-
tractors triggered a reorienting of attention, these results are
instead consistent with a “contingent” form of attentional cap-
ture in which only distracting items that partially overlap with the
subject’s current “control settings” capture attention (Folk et al.,
1992, 1994). Such a mechanism appears to rest at the critical
interaction point of voluntary and involuntary modes of atten-
tion (Yantis, 2000). By this view, the ability to quickly override
attentional capture from items that partially but not completely
match the goals of the individual may be a way to effectively
coordinate both modes of attentional control to facilitate such
complex yet disparate goal-directed behaviors as controlling
working memory (Vogel et al., 2005), tracking moving objects
(Drew and Vogel, 2008), and abstract reasoning (Halford et al.,
2007).
References
Berger A, Henik A, Rafal R (2005) Competition between endogenous and
exogenous orienting of visual attention. J Exp Psychol Gen 134:207–221.
Bleckley MK, Durso FT, Crutchfield JM, Engle RW, Khanna MM (2003)
Individual differences in working memory capacity predict visual atten-
tion allocation. Psychon Bull Rev 10:884–889.
Breitmeyer BG, Ganz L (1976) Implications of sustained and transient
channels for theories of visual-pattern masking, saccadic suppression,
and information-processing. Psychol Rev 83:1–36.
Buschman TJ, Miller EK (2007) Top-down versus bottom-up control of
attention in the prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices. Science
315:1860–1862.
Cowan N (2001) The magical number 4 in short-term memory: a reconsid-
eration of mental storage capacity. Behav Brain Sci 24:87–185.
Cowan N, Elliott EM, Scott Saults J, Morey CC, Mattox S, Hismjatullina A,
Conway AR (2005) On the capacity of attention: its estimation and its
role in working memory and cognitive aptitudes. Cogn Psychol
51:42–100.
Figure 5.
Stimuli and results from experiment 4. A, Example of the spatial blink task for relevant and irrelevant colored
flankers.B,Targetaccuracyforallsubjectsforeachofthethreeconditions.Pleasenotethat“lag”isthetemporaldistancebetween
the flankers and the target. Error bars reflect the SEM. C, Correlation between memory capacity and magnitude of contingent
capture (r  0.52, p  0.01).
8732 • J. Neurosci., July 8, 2009 • 29(27):8726–8733
Fukuda and Vogel • WM and Attentional Capture


Desimone R, Duncan J (1995) Neural mechanisms of selective visual-
attention. Annu Rev Neurosci 18:193–222.
Drew T, Vogel EK (2008) Neural measures of individual differences in se-
lecting and tracking multiple moving objects. J Neurosci 28:4183–4191.
Folk CL, Remington RW, Johnston JC (1992) Involuntary covert orienting
is contingent on attentional control settings. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept
Perform 18:1030–1044.
Folk CL, Remington RW, Wright JH (1994) The structure of attention con-
trol—contingent attentional capture by apparent motion, abrupt onset,
and color. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 20:317–329.
Folk CL, Leber AB, Egeth HE (2002) Made you blink! Contingent atten-
tional capture produces a spatial blink. Percept Psychophys 64:741–753.
Halford GS, Cowan N, Andrews G (2007) Separating cognitive capacity
from knowledge: a new hypothesis. Trends Cogn Sci 11:236–242.
Heinze HJ, Luck SJ, Mangun GR, Hillyard SA (1990) Visual event-related
potentials index focused attention within bilateral stimulus arrays. I. Ev-
idence for early selection. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol
75:511–527.
Hillyard SA, Vogel EK, Luck SJ (1998) Sensory gain control (amplification)
as a mechanism of selective attention: electrophysiological and neuroim-
aging evidence. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 353:1257–1270.
Kane MJ, Engle RW (2003) Working-memory capacity and the control of
attention: the contributions of goal neglect, response competition, and
task set to Stroop interference. J Exp Psychol Gen 132:47–70.
Kane MJ, Bleckley MK, Conway AR, Engle RW (2001) A controlled-
attention view of working-memory capacity. J Exp Psychol Gen
130:169–183.
Kyllonen PC, Christal RE (1990) Reasoning ability is (little more than)
working-memory capacity. Intelligence 14:389–433.
Luck SJ, Vogel EK (1997) The capacity of visual working memory for fea-
tures and conjunctions. Nature 390:279–281.
Mangun GR, Hillyard SA, Luck SJ (1993) Electrocortical substrates of visual
selective attention. In: Attention and performance XIV (Meyer D, Korn-
blum S, eds), pp 219–243, Cambridge, MA: MIT.
McCollough AW, Machizawa MG, Vogel EK (2007) Electrophysiological
measures of maintaining representations in visual working memory. Cor-
tex 43:77–94.
McNab F, Klingberg T (2008) Prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia control
access to working memory. Nat Neurosci 11:103–107.
Miller EK, Cohen JD (2001) An integrative theory of prefrontal cortex func-
tion. Annu Rev Neurosci 24:167–202.
O’Connor DH, Fukui MM, Pinsk MA, Kastner S (2002) Attention modu-
lates responses in the human lateral geniculate nucleus. Nat Neurosci
5:1203–1209.
Pashler H (1988) Familiarity and visual change detection. Percept Psycho-
phys 44:369–378.
Posner MI (1980) Orienting of attention. Q J Exp Psychol 32:3–25.
Sobel KV, Gerrie MP, Poole BJ, Kane MJ (2007) Individual differences in
working memory capacity and visual search: the roles of top-down and
bottom-up processing. Psychon Bull Rev 14:840–845.
Theeuwes J (1994) Stimulus-driven capture and attentional set - selective
search for color and visual abrupt onsets. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept
Perform 20:799–806.
Todd JJ, Marois R (2004) Capacity limit of visual short-term memory in
human posterior parietal cortex. Nature 428:751–754.
Unsworth N, Schrock JC, Engle RW (2004) Working memory capacity and
the antisaccade task: individual differences in voluntary saccade control. J
Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 30:1302–1321.
Vogel EK, Awh E (2008) How to exploit diversity for scientific gain: using
individual differences to constrain cognitive theory. Curr Dir Psychol Sci
17:171–176.
Vogel EK, Machizawa MG (2004) Neural activity predicts individual differ-
ences in visual working memory capacity. Nature 428:748–751.
Vogel EK, Woodman GF, Luck SJ (2001) Storage of features, conjunctions,
and objects in visual working memory. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Per-
form 27:92–114.
Vogel EK, McCollough AW, Machizawa MG (2005) Neural measures reveal
individual differences in controlling access to working memory. Nature
438:500–503.
Xu Y, Chun MM (2006) Dissociable neural mechanisms supporting visual
short-term memory for objects. Nature 440:91–95.
Yantis S, ed (2000) Goal-directed and stimulus-driven determinants of at-
tentional control. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Yantis S, Jonides J (1990) Abrupt visual onsets and selective attention—
voluntary versus automatic allocation. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Per-
form 16:121–134.
Fukuda and Vogel • WM and Attentional Capture
J. Neurosci., July 8, 2009 • 29(27):8726–8733 • 8733


