HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 04 February 2019
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00142
Edited by:
Francesca Pazzaglia,
University of Padova, Italy
Reviewed by:
Gennaro Ruggiero,
Università degli Studi della Campania
Luigi Vanvitelli Caserta, Italy
Chiara Meneghetti,
University of Padova, Italy
*Correspondence:
Ruth C. Dalton
ruth.dalton@northumbria.ac.uk
Christoph Hölscher
choelsch@ethz.ch
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Environmental Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 28 October 2018
Accepted: 15 January 2019
Published: 04 February 2019
Citation:
Dalton RC, Hölscher C and
Montello DR (2019) Wayﬁnding as
a Social Activity.
Front. Psychol. 10:142.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00142
Wayﬁnding as a Social Activity
Ruth C. Dalton1*, Christoph Hölscher2* and Daniel R. Montello3
1 Department of Architecture and Built Environment, University of Northumbria at Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne,
United Kingdom, 2 Department of Humanities, Social and Political Sciences, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3 Department
of Geography, University of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, United States
We discuss the important, but greatly under-researched, topic of the social aspects of
human wayﬁnding during navigation. Wayﬁnding represents the planning and decision-
making component of navigation and is arguably among the most common, real-world
domains of both individual and group-level decision making. We highlight the myriad
ways that wayﬁnding by people is not a solitary psychological process but is inﬂuenced
by the actions of other people, even by their mere presence. We also present a novel
and comprehensive framework for classifying wayﬁnding in complex environments that
incorporates the inﬂuence of other people. This classiﬁcation builds upon the premises
of previous wayﬁnding taxonomies and is further structured into four parts based upon
(1) the nature of the interaction between the actors and (2) the time frame in which
the interaction takes place. We highlight gaps in our current understanding of social
wayﬁnding and outline future research opportunities.
Keywords: social wayﬁnding, navigation, group decision making, spatial cognition, wayﬁnding taxonomy
INTRODUCTION
The study of human wayﬁnding during navigation is central to research on human spatial
cognition. Navigation is a routine, everyday activity and draws upon numerous cognitive functions,
including perception, memory (declarative and non-declarative), imagination, language, reasoning,
and decision-making. Emotion is involved too, as when anxiety impairs spatial decision-making
during emergency egress or when landmarks are more readily recalled when they have a
positive emotional association (Gartner, 2011, 2012; Palmiero and Piccardi, 2017; Ruotolo et al.,
2018). Human and animal navigation has been investigated by diﬀerent research communities
(cognitive, developmental and environmental psychology; geography; anthropology; linguistics;
architecture; animal behavior; neuroscience; robotics and artiﬁcial intelligence [AI]), each with
diﬀerent emphases and methods. We distinguish “locomotion,” the movement of one’s body
coordinated to the proximal environment, from “wayﬁnding,” the planning required for eﬃcient
and goal-directed navigation (Montello, 2005; Montello and Sas, 2006)1. Locomotion depends
on sensori-motor systems interacting with an immediate surrounding, while wayﬁnding invokes
higher-level, cognitive systems to maintain orientation relative to the distal environment. In other
words, wayﬁnding involves ﬁguring out where you are, where you want to go and how to get there,
particularly when your goal cannot be directly sensed at that moment. In this paper, we focus on
the wayﬁnding component of navigation.
1We recognize that some authors have used the term “navigation” as synonymous with our use of “wayﬁnding” (e.g.,
McNamara et al., 2008; Ekstrom et al., 2018).
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
1
February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 142


Dalton et al.
Wayﬁnding as a Social Activity
A considerable range of environmental features inﬂuences
the decision-making of navigators in real-world environments.
Research on spatial cognition from environmental psychology,
behavioral
geography,
and
related
disciplines
has
mostly
concentrated on human-made entities in the environment, such
as buildings or urban street networks, and information displays,
including signage and maps. Wayﬁnding research in cognitive
psychology and neuroscience has concentrated on the internal
processes of how individual wayﬁnders represent and memorize
landmarks and spatial arrangements. But a common feature
shared by nearly all wayﬁnding studies is that they do not take
the co-presence, and potential inﬂuence, of other human beings
into account. The present paper aims to deﬁne and explicate
the contributions that social “others” may have in wayﬁnding
processes. We conclude that these contributions are extensive and
intricate in nature, and that their oversight thus far has distorted
our understanding of wayﬁnding processes. A host of fascinating
issues are raised by our analysis, pointing to ample potential for
further research on the social aspects of wayﬁnding.
Wayﬁnding can be described fundamentally as a decision-
making process (Passini, 1981). It is a prototypical real-world
example of complex cognition (Sternberg and Ben-Zeev, 2001) as
it builds upon people’s perception of the environment, memory of
past experiences, spatial learning processes, motor processes, and
inferential as well as emotional appraisal of navigation options.
Social aspects, i.e., the co-presence of, or interaction with, other
people, can inﬂuence the heuristics, strategies, and expectations
of the wayﬁnder (e.g., Zacharias, 2001).
In the broadest sense, any situation where the presence and/or
activities of others, now or in the past, has an observable
impact on wayﬁnding behavior and cognition can be called
“social wayﬁnding.” This suggests the great breadth—even
ubiquity—of the inﬂuence of the social in wayﬁnding. Even
when other people are not directly present during navigation
or have not provided any information directly relevant to
a traveler’s route choice, it is clear that other individuals,
social groups, institutions, and cultural practices always exert
some inﬂuence on the psychology of wayﬁnding. Tackling
such an exceedingly broad deﬁnition of social wayﬁnding is
beyond the scope of this paper, hence the following section
outlines those aspects of social wayﬁnding excluded from this
paper.
Aspects of Social Wayﬁnding Not
Covered by This Paper
Especially when one considers social wayﬁnding in the broad
sense we have just outlined, a comprehensive overview would
encompass far too much for a single manuscript, perhaps even
too much for a single book. One way we delimit our analysis
here is to focus speciﬁcally on situations where other people
directly or indirectly determine the speciﬁc routes a navigator
chooses while traveling. This still leaves us with a very broad
and diverse topic of interest. In many cases, it includes situations
wherein other people are present where and when the travel
is occurring. But we also include situations wherein the other
people are not present at the time and place of travel, but their
activities in the past inﬂuence the speciﬁc wayﬁnding choices
of a navigator. We discuss both of these situations further
below.
The design of navigation technologies and artifacts (maps,
compasses, sextants, GPS) always reﬂects, in part, the past
decisions and inﬂuences of other people (Hutchins, 1995;
MacEachren,
1995).
Both
built
spaces
and
signage
are
typically designed and positioned by other people, sometimes
following regulatory guidelines or widespread cultural practices
(Weisman, 1981; Hillier and Hanson, 1984; Passini, 1992). The
designers/designs of such navigational artifacts are not within
the scope of this paper.
Another group that falls into this most broad sense might be
termed “others as sources of wisdom”; some navigation strategies
we employ have been learned from instruction by others (in
person or from texts). Even in the least social case of solo
travel, without maps, in wilderness environments, people make
wayﬁnding decisions based, in part, on advice they have acquired
from others (“go to a high point”). In this paper, we do not attempt
to cover the full spectrum of the role of the social in wayﬁnding
since it would contain too much material for a single manuscript.
Finally, some aspects of social wayﬁnding, such as the oﬀering
of route directions, most certainly fall into our core deﬁnition
of social wayﬁnding (these would fall into the bottom-left
quadrant of our taxonomy, as put forward in the next section,
and illustrated in Figure 1), however, since these are covered
reasonably thoroughly elsewhere (e.g., Allen, 1997; Denis et al.,
1999; Denis, 2018) we are electing not to include an overview of
the route directions literature within this paper. We are, instead,
focusing this paper on research that is not yet comprehensively
described in the spatial cognition literature; in the next section
we will outline the scope of social wayﬁnding as included in this
paper.
Scope of Paper
Our analysis of social wayﬁnding focuses speciﬁcally on
situations where other people directly or indirectly determine the
speciﬁc routes a navigator chooses while traveling. This still leaves
a very broad and diverse topic of interest. Primarily this includes
situations where others are co-present during travel. But we also
include situations wherein others are not present at the time and
place of travel, but their activities in the past inﬂuence the speciﬁc
wayﬁnding choices of a navigator. To understand diﬀerent modes
of social wayﬁnding, we need to scrutinize the degree, nature, and
temporal-frame of the inﬂuence exerted on the wayﬁnder.
Perhaps the clearest case of social wayﬁnding is given when
two or more people actively communicate while navigating to
jointly identify and plan a route from A to B, and they both
(or all) wish to jointly reach that destination B. At this most
prototypical level, the activity can be deﬁned as traveling in a
group whilst interacting to determine route choices. However,
this basic activity becomes less social when one individual
inadvertently or intentionally dominates the group-interaction or
when one individual is explicitly assigned the role of leader (e.g.,
the tour guide for an excursion). In these cases, the wayﬁnding
almost reduces to a case of individualistic cognition, and the
role of the other travelers is largely reduced to following the
orders/instructions/route of the leader.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
2
February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 142


Dalton et al.
Wayﬁnding as a Social Activity
FIGURE 1 | The four types of social wayﬁnding: synchronous and strong (upper left); asynchronous and strong (lower left); synchronous and weak (upper right);
asynchronous and weak (lower right).
At the other end of the spectrum, social wayﬁnding can result
from an indirect inﬂuence: a wayﬁnder may use the co-presence
of others as a kind of environmental cue that provides hints about
the suitability of available route choices toward the destination.
For example, a wayﬁnder may choose a route option depending
on how busy it is, such as a route through a train station or public
street. If the wayﬁnder believes that many of the other travelers
are likely to share the same destination (e.g., from the train station
to the football stadium or from the airplane to baggage claim),
he or she may simply “go with the ﬂow.” If, by contrast, the
wayﬁnder assumes that the others are less likely to share the
destination, he or she may choose to ignore that cue or even
deliberately choose an alternative path to avoid being held up by
a slow crowd.
Existing Research on Social Wayﬁnding
The few studies we review below notwithstanding, we believe
the contribution of other people to wayﬁnding decision-making
by humans has been distinctly under-researched. A very large
number of wayﬁnding studies with humans have been conducted,
both experimental and non-experimental, in both laboratory and
ﬁeld settings (to cite just a few: Bronzaft et al., 1976; Kaplan, 1976;
Bovy and Stern, 1990; Peponis et al., 1990; Cornell et al., 1992;
Golledge, 1999; Maguire et al., 2000; Carpman and Grant, 2002;
McNamara et al., 2008; Hill, 2013). In spite of its extensive and
rich history, almost none of this research has studied wayﬁnding
as a social problem but almost always as a problem for single
individuals. This is certainly no less true of the research we
ourselves have done on wayﬁnding (e.g., Montello and Pick, 1993;
Conroy Dalton, 2003; Hölscher et al., 2006). Even in the ﬁelds
of agent-based modeling, simulated pedestrian agents tend to be
solitary and do not include higher-order groups, or if they do, the
groups are merely co-located agents, moving as a single “unit”
rather than interacting meaningfully as a group (McDermott and
Davis, 1984; Yeap and Jeﬀeries, 1999; Kuipers, 2000; Raubal,
2001).
Why has the contribution of other people to wayﬁnding
decisions been so under-researched? One reason is undoubtedly
the intellectual penchant in experimental psychology for seeking
understanding at the individualistic level of analysis (Brennan,
2003). Another must be the extra complexity implied by
analyzing a decision-making process involving two or more
individuals—with its potential for emergent interactions between
the individuals—instead of analyzing it solely at the individual
level. Another, more contemporary, reason for the neglect of
the social in wayﬁnding may be the increasing use of virtual-
reality (VR) technologies as experimental tools and settings for
wayﬁnding research (e.g., Péruch et al., 1997; Ruddle et al.,
1997; Steck and Mallot, 2000; Meilinger et al., 2008). These
experimental environments are typically devoid of other “people,”
although they do not need to be.
An important exception to our claim that social aspects of
wayﬁnding have been relatively neglected is the substantial body
of research on verbal wayﬁnding instructions (“route directions”)
(Klein, 1983; Allen, 1997; Denis et al., 1999; Lovelace et al., 1999;
Hölscher et al., 2011; Denis, 2018). We omit a detailed review
of literature on giving and interpreting verbal route directions
here, in part to keep our manuscript tractable but also because
it is covered fairly thoroughly elsewhere, as we have just cited;
research on route directions covers only a small, albeit important,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
3
February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 142


Dalton et al.
Wayﬁnding as a Social Activity
portion of the issues surrounding social wayﬁnding. In fact, most
research on wayﬁnding instructions only implicitly involves the
social aspects of wayﬁnding, the involvement of multiple people
(or navigation software created by people) notwithstanding. Most
of this research instead focuses on the informational content
provided in the instructions (i.e., how many words, landmarks,
metric statements, etc., the instructions contain). Wunderlich
and Reinelt (1982) is a notable exception, concentrating on the
nature of the dialog between two people in a conversational
exchange about routes. So we certainly do include wayﬁnding
instructions as a case of social wayﬁnding, but we do not discuss
it much here as it is thoroughly discussed in other literature (e.g.,
the citations above).
Besides the work on wayﬁnding instructions, we ﬁnd very little
research on the social aspects of wayﬁnding decision-making.
A few studies have come out recently on social interaction during
collective navigation. Reilly et al. (2009) looked at the use of
mobile devices (smart phones) during navigation, although the
emphasis in this study was on how the device is shared rather than
on how collaborative wayﬁnding decisions are made. A few other
studies have focused on social wayﬁnding that is more directly
collaborative. Forlizzi et al. (2010) observed the interaction
between members of dyads (couples) traveling while using in-
vehicle navigation systems, oﬀering suggestions for system design
following from their observations of wayﬁnding interactions.
Haddington (2012, 2013) conducted an interesting study on
gestures and conversational interchanges about navigation
among people riding in a car. Similarly, He et al. (2015) observed
pairs of individuals walking routes in an unfamiliar urban setting.
The two members simultaneously walked two diﬀerent routes
while they gave each other instructions over cellphones about
how to follow the route being traversed by the other member.
These studies observe ongoing social interaction among actors
who are navigating together, focusing on interacting dyads in
particular contexts. We believe this work is a promising start
but, as we discuss below, we also believe social wayﬁnding goes
well beyond groups of dyads and also well beyond synchronous
interaction between members of groups who are concurrently
traveling.
An interesting study that does go beyond dyads and
considers the possible social interactions of multiple wayﬁnding
people was undertaken by Haghani and Sarvi (2017), who
were looking at the role of social behaviors during simulated
emergency evacuations. They found that “navigational escape
strategies of humans are. . . signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by both
physical factors of the escape environment. . . and the social
interactions.” (p. 53). However, this paper solely focused on
wayﬁnding behavior in an emergency scenario and may not,
therefore, be predictive of behavior in everyday wayﬁnding
tasks.
One of the most important and developed bodies of work
on wayﬁnding that explicitly incorporates the social is the
work of Hutchins on “cognition in the wild” (Hutchins, 1995).
Above, we cited his ideas about navigation technologies and
artifacts as providing a sociocultural context for navigation,
but he goes much further in conceptualizing the social in
wayﬁnding. In fact, he had the larger aim in his work of socially
contextualizing human cognitive research more broadly than
just navigation, but he chose navigation as his main test case
(which may be signiﬁcant in and of itself). Hutchins proposes
that human reasoning and problem-solving is fundamentally a
social and cultural process, embedded in group communication
and symbolic artifacts created by past cultural-group members.
His main test case was technical sea-navigation on a ship by
members of the U.S. Navy. Navigational decisions arise from
a series of communications back and forth along formally
established social links between sailors holding speciﬁc posts,
using particular observations and technologies to contribute
information to larger navigational decisions. When functioning
well, the components work together to improve the validity,
reliability, and resolution of decisions about ship localization,
heading, landmark identiﬁcation, distances, and directions.
Hutchins observed that the cognition of groups may be quite
diﬀerent from the cognition of the individuals involved in the
group task, and not just the sum of the individual contributions.
His work is an exceptional example of research on the social in
wayﬁnding but as will become evident below, it only scratches
the surface of this topic.
Finally, there is extensive research on group/social interaction
and collaborative decision-making in contexts other than
navigation (e.g., summaries in Swap, 1984; Davis, 1992; Ellis and
Fisher, 1994). Much of this is in the context of collaborative
computing environments, such as research on computer-
supported cooperative work (CSCW) and social computing
(Munro et al., 1999; Höök et al., 2003; Tougne et al., 2008)2.
However, the results of broader research on group/team
interaction and decision-making have not yet been applied to
wayﬁnding during navigation.
THE FOUR TYPES OF SOCIAL
WAYFINDING
In this section, we present a novel and comprehensive
classiﬁcation
for
social
wayﬁnding.
Recognizing
that
all
wayﬁnding decisions can, to a greater or lesser extent, be
recognized as incorporating some inﬂuence or aspect of the
social, we restate our interest here only in situations where
other people directly or indirectly inﬂuence the speciﬁc routes
a navigator chooses while traveling. We propose that social
wayﬁnding in this sense can be broadly divided into two types,
termed “Strong” and “Weak” social wayﬁnding. One might also
refer to Strong social wayﬁnding as collaborative wayﬁnding
and Weak social wayﬁnding as people-as-cues. Table 1 lists the
primary characteristics of these two types of social wayﬁnding.
The primary distinction between Strong and Weak social
wayﬁnding is the degree of intentionality characterizing the
communication (information exchange) of the two types. Strong
2This research area is often called “social navigation” in the HCI community. The
navigation is metaphorical, however, as it refers to travel through “information”
space. It is an ongoing research issue as to how closely processes of navigation in
literal and information spaces correspond. We expect that some of the processes
observed in one type of space will also be observable in the other; we also expect
they diﬀer psychologically in important ways.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
4
February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 142


Dalton et al.
Wayﬁnding as a Social Activity
TABLE 1 | Typical characteristics of the two primary types of social wayﬁnding:
strong type and weak type.
Strong Type (Collaborative)
Weak Type (People-as-Cues)
Direct
Indirect
Reciprocal
Unidirectional
Proximal
Distal
Verbal/gestural
Non-verbal
Acquaintance/s
Stranger/s
Rarely many
Often many
social wayﬁnding involves intentional communication about
wayﬁnding between actors (often co-navigators), wherein one
or more individuals intend to communicate information about
location or route choice to one or more other individuals.
Weak social wayﬁnding involves unintentional communication
about wayﬁnding between actors (often not co-navigators); for
this type, one or more individuals unintentionally communicate
information about location or route choice to one or more
other individuals. The person sending wayﬁnding cues as part
of Weak social wayﬁnding is generally unaware of providing this
information, of course, but even the recipient may not always be
aware they are picking up and following cues from others. Both
senders and recipients engaging in Strong social wayﬁnding are
aware of exchanging information3.
Strong
social
wayﬁnding
generally
involves
direct
communication between senders and recipients, most often
between individuals in close proximity (although one can
use pointing gestures to communicate, at a distance, about
directions). Weak social wayﬁnding can also occur over short
distances but very often occurs distally, over great distances
(but still within the range of sensory access). At least in the
synchronous case (below), the communication occurring as part
of Strong social wayﬁnding frequently involves true interaction
in that is it is reciprocal—both the sender and the receiver of
wayﬁnding information may contribute at diﬀerent moments
to the communicative exchange (as when the recipient tells
the sender how familiar he or she is with a particular place).
In contrast, communication during Weak social wayﬁnding
is non-interactional and unidirectional from the sender to the
recipient.
The communication that takes place during Strong social
wayﬁnding involves gestures such as pointing and graphics such
as sketch maps but very often includes verbal communication,
and often between acquaintances rather than strangers. During
Weak social wayﬁnding, in contrast, communication can be
gestural or verbal (as when you overhear someone talking
about the route he or she will take) but is most often
based on seeing where people are or were traveling (hearing
can play this role in Weak Synchronous social wayﬁnding—
see below). The contact that occurs as part of Weak social
wayﬁnding is very often between complete strangers. Finally,
Strong and Weak social wayﬁnding can occur both among
3Of course, when the sender is a computer navigation system, we can consider the
information exchange intentional but probably want to avoid saying the system is
“aware” of what it is doing.
multiple senders and recipients, not just two individuals, but
multiple actors are much more common in the case of Weak
social wayﬁnding. In fact, the locations and headings of sizeable
crowds of people in the environment are frequently particularly
informative for the Weak type. As we have suggested, these
characteristics are not “hard and fast” rules, but they do
generally distinguish the two types of social wayﬁnding in most
cases.
We can further expand this classiﬁcation of the two types
of social wayﬁnding according to the time frames in which
they occur. We distinguish two time modes: Synchronous
and Asynchronous social wayﬁnding. The Synchronous mode
occurs when the communicative acts of sending and receiving
wayﬁnding information are roughly co-present in time and
space. The persons involved during the act are perceptually
accessible to each other (or at least the sender is accessible
to the receiver), either because of literal co-presence in space
or because of telecommunication technologies like telephones.
All other social wayﬁnding communications may be termed
Asynchronous; the sender and receiver are not co-present during
the information exchange. Table 1 can therefore be expanded
into a two-by-two structure, shown in Figure 1. In the following
sections, we describe each of the four quadrants of Figure 1 in
detail.
Strong Synchronous Social Wayﬁnding
Strong Synchronous social wayﬁnding occurs when the inﬂuence
of others takes place during navigation. This is Strong
Synchronous social wayﬁnding when, instead of a single person
making wayﬁnding decisions by herself or himself, the person
actively makes wayﬁnding decisions with intentional input
from others (please refer to Figure 4, under the category
of “navigational assistant”). The others may accompany the
navigator, in which case they collectively ﬁnd their way together.
Alternatively the others may provide wayﬁnding instructions,
typically in spoken form, but also by gestural pointing to the
surrounding area or on a map. Automatically generated route
instructions, consulted during travel, would also count as Strong
Synchronous social wayﬁnding, inasmuch as the system was
designed and programmed by another human being. In all
these scenarios, the contribution of others is direct, intentional,
proximal, and typically verbal and/or gestural. In both scenarios,
the others are almost always few in number—one or a small
group, not crowds. When the others accompany the navigator,
they usually know the person in advance; people who only
provide instructions are usually strangers to begin, but the
exchange of information is a form of social introduction between
people.
The sociologist Goﬀman (1971) undertook seminal theoretical
work on the composition and terminology of small social groups
(see Figure 2A). According to Goﬀman, “a ‘single’ is a party of
one, a person who has come alone, a person ‘by himself [herself]’,
even though there may be other individuals near him [her] and
he [she] has cause for talking to them.” In contrast, “a ‘with’
is a party of more than one whose members are perceived to
be ‘together’. They maintain some kind of ecological proximity,
ensuring the closeness that ordinarily permits easy conversation
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
5
February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 142


Dalton et al.
Wayﬁnding as a Social Activity
FIGURE 2 | (A) Goffman’s classiﬁcation of pedestrian groups (1971). (B) Characteristics of individuals in a group, illustrated as a dyad, (that inﬂuence wayﬁnding
interactions). It should be noted that for higher-order groups (three or more), each member of the group will carry such characteristics and possible interactions
between group members will be multiplied accordingly. Emergent leadership will thus be important at the group level in order to synchronize wayﬁnding behaviors.
and the exclusion of non-members who otherwise might intercept
talk.” And, ﬁnally, Goﬀman describes the “family ﬂock” as, “an
example of a ‘with’. A family ‘with’ in a public place will sometimes
walk in partial ﬁle, or spaced abreast more than a foot apart,
making talk a little diﬃcult.” (Goﬀman, 1971, pp. 19–20). The
accompaniment form of Strong Synchronous social wayﬁnding
is ﬁrmly focussed on the wayﬁnding processes of “withs.”
Helbing and colleagues (Helbing et al., 2000, 2001; for an
overview see Moussaid et al., 2009) undertook research on
the relative frequency of diﬀerent sizes of groups of “withs”
and found that dyads were the most frequently occurring.
Higher-order “withs” decreased in frequency corresponding
to the number of people present: Three-person “withs” are
less common than dyads but more frequent than four-
person groups,
etc.
Terminology
and composition
aside,
neither Goﬀman’s nor Helbing’s work are concerned with
the types of interaction and communication that take place
within groups making wayﬁnding decisions, but we believe
it would be productive to explore their application to this
domain.
It is clear that not all groups are equal; we begin with the
simplest group, that of a dyad. Some of the studies we cited
above have addressed Strong Synchronous social wayﬁnding by
dyads. Reilly et al. (2009) investigated how dyads coordinated
the use of a digital map on a mobile phone. They identiﬁed the
emergence of both leader/follower styles within the dyads as well
as collaborative styles wherein dyad members interacted on equal
footing and with equal levels of engagement. Of course, there is
often a disparity of spatial knowledge within a dyad. One person
may be more familiar4 with the environment than the other, in
which case, you would typically expect the person with greater
familiarity to assume more of a leadership role in the collaborative
wayﬁnding [as familiarity is suggested to increase accuracy of
direction decisions (Gartner, 2011, 2012)], and the person with
less familiarity to tacitly permit himself or herself to be guided,
since they would be more likely to make wayﬁnding errors
(Chebat et al., 2005). If both members of the dyad are equally
unfamiliar with the environment, then you would expect to ﬁnd
greater mutual decision-making, resulting in more discussion or
debate about route choices.
We can also expect that dyads will often be composed of
members with diﬀerent navigational abilities—with a diﬀerent
“sense-of-direction” (Hegarty et al., 2002) or with diﬀerent
“cognitive styles” (Aggarwal and Wooley, 2013). In their study
of interacting dyads cited above, He et al. (2015) looked at
4We do not address familiarity explicitly in this paper, however, it is implicitly built-
in, as it forms a key component of Wiener et al.’s taxonomy, which we expand, at
the end of this paper (2009). In their original model they assume, as do we by
extension, that familiarity with an environment certainly inﬂuences wayﬁnding
strategies.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
6
February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 142


Dalton et al.
Wayﬁnding as a Social Activity
navigators describing routes to each other over a cellphone as a
function of whether both members reported having a good sense-
of-direction, both reported having a poor sense-of-direction,
or the members reported having a diﬀerent sense-of-direction
(the researchers created the dyads in this way). The researchers
found that pairs diﬀering greatly in sense-of-direction found
the task more diﬃcult and time consuming, and they observed
diﬀerences in the types of landmarks mentioned by members
providing directions as a function of their sense-of-direction.
We speculate that when a person with good sense-of-direction
is paired with a partner who has poor sense-of-direction, the
better navigator would often assume a more dominant role in
the decision-making processes, and the worse navigator a more
subservient role. Ultimately, however, belief is more important
than reality with variables like familiarity and ability; to assume
leadership or subservience, it only matters that one believes one is
more or less familiar or better or worse at wayﬁnding (belief and
reality do often match with these particular variables). Bonner
and Bolinger’s (2013) paper on “Separating the conﬁdent from
the correct” is a clear example of the diﬀerences that can occur
between being the most knowledgeable person in the group
versus thinking one is the most knowledgeable. If these ﬁndings
are extrapolated to wayﬁnding situations, it becomes clear how
one less knowledgeable or less able wayﬁnder might lead a whole
group astray.
We further expect that other variables characterizing the two
individuals in a dyad will moderate the expression of familiarity
and sense of direction, such as the gender of the two people,
their relative social status, and aspects of their personalities such
as extroversion or dominance (summarized in Figure 2B). For
instance, if one person is of lower status than the other (a
child accompanying a parent, or an employee accompanying a
boss), the person of lower status might be loath to question the
wayﬁnding decisions of the higher-status wayﬁnding partner.
Presumably this would happen even if the low-status person
believes he or she has superior environmental knowledge or
wayﬁnding abilities. As another example, a more domineering
person might naturally assume leadership even though he or
she may not be more familiar or able within the dyad. In
fact, in their study of dyads interacting while using in-vehicle
navigation systems, Forlizzi et al. (2010) observed that the
nature of collaborative interactions varied among dyads and was
inﬂuenced by the individual’s social role, and his or her role
as driver or “navigator.” The authors noted that none of these
interesting phenomena could be identiﬁed by the traditional
research paradigm that conceptualizes navigation as a solitary act.
We further expect characteristics of group members to operate
diﬀerently as a function of the cultural context of the navigation.
For example, gender typing is not equivalent in all cultures.
Although the notion that males have a better of sense-of-
direction5 or should take the role of leader in contexts of
wayﬁnding is fairly common across cultures, it is certainly not
equally pronounced in all.
5Although preliminary ﬁndings for the crowd-sourced, navigational-data game,
Sea Hero Quest, indicate that wayﬁnding performance is 11% better in men than
women across all age groups (Spiers et al., 2017).
The examples thus far consider the simplest form of Goﬀman’s
“with,” namely the dyad. But we certainly believe it is interesting
and important to consider groups larger than dyads. Once we
get into higher-order “withs,” where each constituent member of
the group can be characterized by their gender, environmental
familiarity, spatial ability, social status, personality, and so on,
it is clear that wayﬁnding decision-making processes become
increasingly complex. Given the complex patterns of interactions
between the diﬀerent variables, traditional empirical methods
of observation and measurement would likely be inadequate
by themselves to understand emergent eﬀects in larger groups.
Detailed computational models would help here, such as spatially
and socially intelligent agent-based models.
It
is
not
surprising
that
intergroup
communication
during
wayﬁnding
occasionally
goes
awry.
Many
people
have experienced the situation of navigating as part of a pair,
whereby each person has implicitly assumed that the other knows
where they are going. Each person accordingly but mistakenly
assumes a subservient role, only for both parties to eventually
realize that neither of the pair are eﬀectively leading, but both
are attempting to follow. This situation also highlights the fact
that quite often the disparate roles within a wayﬁnding group
are adopted without prior negotiation (i.e., they are assumed or
inferred), adding even more complexity to understanding these
phenomena.
Individual wayﬁnders may rely on internal mental capacities
only, such as their knowledge and spatial reasoning. By contrast,
wayﬁnders in groups may also have to take into account the
preferences of other group members. The degree to which a
person adopts the perspective of others and takes into account
the eﬀects of their own behavior on the options of other people
is referred to as “social mindfulness.” According Van Doesum
et al. (2013), this social mindfulness entails aﬀective perspective
taking as well as empathic concern. The degree to which
such social mindfulness could have an impact on wayﬁnding
decision-making is limited by the willingness to coordinate with
another person. Of course, mindfulness for others’ thoughts
and feelings, and the social negotiations that attend these
concerns, can certainly decrease the eﬃciency of group decision-
making compared to solo decision-making. Interestingly, such
concern can even make group decision-making less eﬀective,
because of the distraction of considering others, conﬂicts between
alternative views that are resolved sub-optimally, and so on.
Clearly, we should not expect that two heads are always better
than one when people co-wayﬁnd (Hill, 1982; Burte, 2004). It
should be clear from the discussion in this section that in order
to fully investigate and come to understand collaborative group
wayﬁnding, we will need to draw upon the expertise of a wide-
range of academic disciplines, with the diversity of their concepts
and methods.
Strong Asynchronous Social Wayﬁnding
Strong social wayﬁnding can also be performed asynchronously,
wherein communication about wayﬁnding decisions occur at a
time prior to the actual travel (typically in another place, as
well). An example of this would be instructions given to the
wayﬁnder by another person or navigation system, instructions
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
7
February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 142


Dalton et al.
Wayﬁnding as a Social Activity
that are written, spoken, or gestured, with or without the aid
of commercial maps (i.e., personalized or customized for the
intended recipient). This is, once again, captured in Figure 4
under the category of “navigational assistant.” Sketched maps are
much more common as a mode for delivering instructions in the
Asynchronous type than the Synchronous type. As we explained
above, however, we do not discuss the provision of wayﬁnding
instructions further in this paper, whether Synchronously or
Asynchronously delivered. Thus, we have little more to add
here to our analysis of Strong Asynchronous social wayﬁnding.
We do observe that both Synchronous and Asynchronous
Strong social wayﬁnding involving instructions supplied by
a non-traveler—an “outsider”—are clearly less “democratic”
forms of aided wayﬁnding than Strong wayﬁnding usually is.
Supplying instructions to others typically includes one person
with knowledge assisting a second person (or group) without
knowledge, but without actually accompanying the second person
(or group) during travel.
Weak Synchronous Social Wayﬁnding
In contrast to Strong social wayﬁnding, other people can
inﬂuence
wayﬁnding
decision-making
in
indirect
and
unintentional ways, which we call Weak social wayﬁnding.
When this Weak inﬂuence expresses itself during the actual
travel of a navigating person, it is not only Weak but also
Synchronous. This type is reminiscent of the observation by
Munro (cited in Munro et al., 1999): “[W]e ﬁnd our ways through
spaces from talking to or following the trails of crowds of people”
(Preface, pages unnumbered).
Consider a couple of questions. Have you ever stepped oﬀ
a train or emerged at an airport gate and blithely followed the
dominant ﬂow of people, only to discover that they were leading
you somewhere other than to your intended destination? Have
you ever hesitated to walk down a street because of the presence
of a group of people that seemed somehow, unexpectedly, “out
of place” and hence potentially threatening? These situations
suggest to us to a basic hypothesis, originally formulated by
Dalton et al. (2011): people in un-crowded, relatively sparse
environments (i.e., the “normal” milieu) inﬂuence where others
go, and they do it in one of two ways that we term “person-place
cues” and “person-space cues.”
The distinction between person-place cues and person-space
cues is subtle but we think it is worth making. The notion
of “person-place cues” holds that the location of people in
an environment suggests the popularity of that speciﬁc place.
More people will visit a place that more people want to visit,
in other words. This might be due to a temporary event
occurring at that place, for example, a street performance artist,
or more permanent activities located there, such as shops. People
consciously or unconsciously “read” this inferred popularity and
make travel decisions accordingly. This inference is more likely
to aﬀect route decisions during exploratory-type behaviors such
as when one is drifting through an unfamiliar city, wandering
around an art gallery, or making spontaneous shopping trips. It
is used to judge restaurants: if you are a stranger to a city and are
trying to decide which of two restaurants to eat in, do you pick the
relatively full one or the empty one? It is clear from this example
that we often equate the presence of other people as indicating the
popularity and, by extension, even the quality of a place. Hence
the term person-place cues.
In contrast, as “person-space cues,” more people in an area
imply locations in a spatial layout (a city, a public building)
that are better connected to the rest of the layout and more
centrally located. Not that the speciﬁc place is more popular,
but that the rest of the layout is spatially more accessible from
that place and, hence, will tend to contain more people over
time. The idea of people-space cues is inspired by space syntax
theory (Hillier and Hanson, 1984; Bafna, 2003). Space syntax
suggests that people pick up visual cues leading to accurate
inferences about a space’s importance within the surrounding
environment. So-called “integrated” streets readily connect to
many other streets and locations; “segregated” streets do not
readily lead to many other streets or locations. We read these cues
largely unconsciously, having gradually learned their signiﬁcance
through our cumulative experience in similar environments.
There will generally be a linear correspondence between the
numbers of people walking along a street and that street’s relative
status (degree of integration) within the overall settlement
(village, town, or city). However, a mismatch between the
perceived spatial hierarchy of a street and the number of people
present (the pattern of occupancy) will be read as being a
somewhat strange or unexpected phenomenon.
We note the causally reciprocal nature of the interrelations
between the presence of people, the popularity of places, and
the integration/segregation values of streets. For instance, over
time, more integrated locations will attract shops, which, in
turn, will attract more people; thus, a multiplier eﬀect takes
place. This presents a considerable challenge to developing an
empirical framework for testing the eﬀects of person-place and
person-space cues in naturally existing built environments.
Finally, many of the phenomena of Weak Synchronous
social wayﬁnding in humans relate to a research tradition on
“collective navigation” within the study of animal behavior.
Larkin and Walton (1969) discussed the idea that ﬁsh swimming
as members of a school will orient more successfully than the
individual ﬁsh, as long as the individuals have some orientation
ability and obey a simple heuristic to follow the groups’ mean
direction. Furthermore, as a result of statistical properties of
the errors of individual direction estimates compared to the
group mean estimate, this collective advantage will increase with
increasing school size. The phenomenon harkens back to Galton’s
demonstration in 1907 (Galton, 1907) that there is “wisdom
in crowds”; he demonstrated this by showing that the mean
estimate of the weight of an ox by a group of individuals was
more accurate than almost all of the individual estimates. The
superiority of average group decisions over individual decisions
based only on simple rules of group aggregation or cohesion
is also known as the “many wrongs principle” (Simons, 2004;
Berdahl et al., 2016). Faria et al. (2009) directly examined
the many wrongs principle with humans, in the context of
orientation decisions. They had individuals and groups of 2–
10 people attempt to walk toward hidden targets in a circular
arena 5 m in radius. Given the simple instruction to stay
together, the researchers found improved group performance
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
8
February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 142


Dalton et al.
Wayﬁnding as a Social Activity
(lower angular error) over individual estimates, but only for
certain group sizes and initial degrees of individual uncertainty.
It would clearly be fruitful to further investigate the many
wrongs principle for group wayﬁnding decisions by humans.
Undoubtedly, many phenomena of Weak Synchronous social
wayﬁnding are instances of collective navigation as non-human
animal researchers conceive of it. However, we note that none
of those who research non-humans assign complex cognition
to their research subjects. We recognize that humans often act
on the basis of simple heuristics, habits, and other unconscious
processes, but we also know that humans sometimes act on
the basis of complex internal representations, explicit reasoning
processes, and the like.
Weak Asynchronous Social Wayﬁnding
As is true for Strong social wayﬁnding, Weak social wayﬁnding
can be manifested asynchronously as well as synchronously. How
can people serve as wayﬁnding cues without doing so during the
time a navigator moves through the environment? The answer
is that the presence of other people often leaves telltale physical
traces of their presence, movement, or other actions within the
environment. These traces are available for navigators to read
after—sometimes long after—the people who made the traces
have left the scene.
Despite not being a paper on the topic of wayﬁnding,
the variety and richness of potential physical traces is well
summarized by Zeisel (1981), who describes four broad
categories: By-Products of Use, Adaptations for Use, Displays of
Self, and Public Messages. These are listed in Table 2, with speciﬁc
sub-types of each broad category indicated in parentheses. We
do not review these in detail here (see instead, Zeisel, 1981),
but it will serve our discussion to go over some examples that
are especially relevant to social wayﬁnding. The most obvious
example is By-Products of Use we refer to as “social trails.”
Social trails (or “desire lines”) are the visible paths, often across
grass (easily abraded), created by the repeated footfall of past
pedestrians taking “shortcuts” through the environment. The
presence of such a trail tells us something about the spatial
structure of our immediate surroundings and of the activity
patterns of other people. It says such a shortcut exists and that by
following the path, we might discover an eﬃcient route to a place
to which other people have previously traveled, and to which
we may want to go. Social trails are clearly the Asynchronous
version of Weak social wayﬁnding, speciﬁcally people-space cues.
Such social wayﬁnding is indirect, distal, non-verbal, and created
TABLE 2 | Types of physical traces in the environment that wayﬁnders can use to
infer the locations and nature of prior activities by other people.
Types of traces
By-Products of Use (erosions, leftovers, missing traces)
Adaptations for Use (props, separations, connections)
Displays of Self (personalization, identiﬁcation, group membership)
Public Messages (ofﬁcial, unofﬁcial, illegitimate)
Adapted from Zeisel (1981).
by strangers in sizable numbers. See the upper left quadrant of
Figure 3 for an example of social trails.
We cite and discuss Zeisel’s work here only to provide
rich examples of physical traces of human activity in the
environment that could inform the wayﬁnding decisions of
navigators. Zeisel’s book itself was not speciﬁcally concerned
with navigation or social cues. Those listed in Table 2 include
traces of occupation or events other than locomotion. Some of
these are the asynchronous version of people-place cues, i.e., they
say something about the attractiveness of a place rather than
the spatial structure of a movement network. Examples might
include evidence of children playing (hopscotch drawn in chalk
on the sidewalk/pavement), leading us to conclude that this route
is part of a residential neighborhood and is probably fairly safe.
Broken shop-windows might give the opposite impression of
danger: a wayﬁnder might naturally avoid routes with broken
windows and graﬃti, deeming them potentially unsafe. In the
bottom right section of Figure 3, we see an image of a “ghost-
bike,” which signals that a cyclist has been involved in a fatal
accident at this location. Although the sighting of a ghost bike
might not inﬂuence travelers to avoid a route, it might make
them more conscious of the traﬃc dangers and induce them to
cross the street using an oﬃcial crosswalk/pedestrian crossing.
These examples make clear that for someone ﬁnding his or her
way, it is not only the direct presence or absence of people, or
explicit navigational instructions, that contribute to route-choice
decisions; so can traces of prior movement/occupation.
Weak and Strong Social Wayﬁnding
Combined
Throughout this paper we have dealt with Weak and Strong
social wayﬁnding separately for sake of clarity. However, it
should be evident that it is possible for both types to take
place simultaneously. For example a couple might be navigating
through a strange city, mutually making wayﬁnding decisions
when required (Strong Synchronous) whilst also attempting to
follow an incomplete sketch-map drawn for them previously by
a third-party (Strong Asynchronous). Suddenly they notice a
large group of people emerging from a building on the other
side of an urban square and surmise that this is most likely
the transit station they are seeking (Weak Synchronous). Rather
than walk around the perimeter of the square, they then notice
a worn path that leads directly across the middle of the square
and decide to follow this social trail (Weak Asynchronous). This
scenario illustrates a range of diﬀerent ways in which other people
contribute, directly or indirectly, to wayﬁnding decision-making
processes and outcomes.
INTEGRATING SOCIAL WAYFINDING
INTO EXISTING WAYFINDING
TAXONOMIES
Finally, we consider how to integrate social aspects of wayﬁnding
into existing models of wayﬁnding. A number of classiﬁcations
of navigation behavior have been proposed in the literature (e.g.,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
9
February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 142


Dalton et al.
Wayﬁnding as a Social Activity
FIGURE 3 | Examples of physical traces of human activity in the environment that could inform the wayﬁnding decisions of navigators (bottom right photograph of a
‘ghost bike’ courtesy of Damian Cugley, 2007).
FIGURE 4 | Proposed additions to Wiener et al. (2009) wayﬁnding taxonomy indicating where the strong/weak and synchronous/asynchronous types of social
wayﬁnding would ﬁt.
Kuipers, 1978, 2000; Allen, 1999; Mallot, 1999; Montello, 2001,
2005) many of which were reviewed methodically in a paper by
Wiener et al. (2009). In this paper, Wiener et al. use Montello’s
deﬁnition of wayﬁnding (Montello, 2001, 2005) as a starting
point to develop a taxonomy of wayﬁnding that concentrates
on how diﬀerent levels and degrees of spatial knowledge (about
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
10
February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 142


Dalton et al.
Wayﬁnding as a Social Activity
landmarks, routes, survey relationships) fundamentally structure
the nature of a wayﬁnding task and the likely solution strategies
that will be applied to carry it out. In this model (as in all others)
the wayﬁnder is treated as an individual and no mention of social
factors is given; this is, therefore, the taxonomy of wayﬁnding
that we selected in order in order to determine whether or not we
could augment it with additional features of social wayﬁnding.
Based on the typology of social wayﬁnding we provide in
this paper, the Wiener et al. (2009) taxonomy can be extended
(see Figure 4 showing how our framework might augment their
original taxonomy) at two levels: just as wayﬁnding can be
separated into aided and unaided, the wayﬁnder can be alone
or can travel as part of a group of collaborative wayﬁnders. The
standard case of “together” wayﬁnding would be a group of two
or more people who jointly aim to ﬁnd their way from A to B,
without using explicit navigation aids. Each individual can be
characterized in terms of his or her degree of active “wayﬁnding
involvement” in the decision-making process, to any extent from
fully to not at all. Full involvement would be involvement in the
wayﬁnding decision-making to the same extent as if he or she
were wayﬁnding alone, completely responsible for the decision.
No involvement would be equivalent to quietly acquiescing to
whatever others decide (tourists following a guide or children
following their parents). Quantifying degrees of involvement
would be an interesting and challenging research task, but it
seems conceptually coherent to see it as a matter of the number
and nature of comments the individual makes to the group, the
passion or conﬁdence brought to the discussion, and so on.
Related to the issue of each individual’s involvement, any
wayﬁnding group can be characterized in terms of the degree to
which responsibility for wayﬁnding decisions is shared equally
among group members or concentrated in an incomplete subset
of the group, often a single person. We propose to refer to
this as the “wayﬁnding egalitarianism” of the group, ranging
from autocratic to fully egalitarian. In the autocratic group,
one individual makes the wayﬁnding decisions for the group
entirely on his or her own. In the perfectly egalitarian group,
each individual contributes equally to the wayﬁnding decisions
of the group. By using these terms, we do not mean to imply
that the distribution of wayﬁnding responsibility within a group
is necessarily a matter of fairness or social justice. In many
cases, people are happy, even grateful, to let someone take
responsibility for wayﬁnding decisions, or only a subset of group
members have information relevant to wayﬁnding decisions.
However, there will certainly be situations where more conﬁdent
or domineering group members assume control over wayﬁnding
decisions, without assent from other group members.
There are two types of social wayﬁnding we have discussed
that can readily be identiﬁed as part of the Aided Wayﬁnding
side of the Wiener et al. (2009) taxonomy. We also classify
these as part of Strong social wayﬁnding. These are when
the social other explicitly provides wayﬁnding instructions to
guide the travelers without wishing to travel to the destination
with those travelers (“human guide” in Figure 4). As we
have seen, wayﬁnding instructions, sketch maps, and gestures
can be supplied synchronously or asynchronously. Of course,
Aided Wayﬁnding in the Wiener et al. taxonomy also includes
commercially produced maps and signs. As we discussed above,
we recognize the sociocultural nature of these semiotic artifacts,
but have not discussed them in this paper because they are not
tailored to speciﬁc people or speciﬁc trips. By contrast, we do
treat the “navigational assistants” that Wiener et al. include in this
category as cases of social wayﬁnding, not only because people
originally created and programmed the systems but because the
systems do create wayﬁnding instructions tailored to speciﬁc
origin-destination trips.
The relationship of our Weak social wayﬁnding types to the
Wiener et al. taxonomy is interesting and not obvious. We lean
toward considering them as Unaided Wayﬁnding. Wayﬁnding
aids such as maps, signs, and verbal instructions are intentionally
created “semiotic artifacts” (Montello and Sas, 2006) designed
to provide wayﬁnding information and guidance. The presence
of others (Weak Synchronous) and physical traces of their past
presence (Weak Asynchronous) are not semiotic artifacts—they
are people who are, or were, doing their own thing. They are
analogous to traditional landmarks, environmental features that
can (and very often do) provide cues to orientation without
having been intentionally created for that purpose. In contrast,
a sign acting as a sign, rather than a memorable object, is not
a landmark but a semiotic artifact. We do want to highlight
the special nature of other people as environmental cues, both
people-place and people-space, so we propose to add a category
to the taxonomy of Unaided Wayﬁnding we call “Social Cues.”
Finally, Wiener et al. (2009) explicitly point out that their
taxonomy does not imply a real-world wayﬁnding task should
always be classiﬁed into only one of the categories in the
taxonomy. For example, a traveler may start out in exploration
mode when window-shopping in the city, but once she or he
wants to get back to the car, the trip turns into path search or
path planning (depending on how much attention was paid to
memorizing the travel during exploration).
CONCLUSION
Other people can act in three broad roles as part of wayﬁnding:
as co-decider, route instructor, or environmental cue. There
are signiﬁcant gaps in our understanding of social wayﬁnding.
It is without doubt an under-researched area. It poses a host
of interesting but diﬃcult research issues, made all the more
complex by the emergent properties of groups of interacting
individuals, and by the number of diﬀerent academic disciplines
we believe are required to investigate these phenomena. The role
of social factors in wayﬁnding is important both for basic research
and for applications. An example of application is the growing
area of developing and evaluating digital navigational aids (such
as mobile/handheld navigational assistants). The importance of
social wayﬁnding is clearly relevant to the user experience and
functionality of these aids. The growing research on indoor
navigation (e.g., Frankenstein et al., 2012), such as shopping
centers and airports, is another area where social ideas area
particularly relevant.
Our understanding of the mechanisms and information
sources contributing to decision-making during wayﬁnding
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
11
February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 142


Dalton et al.
Wayﬁnding as a Social Activity
needs to include social aspects to become comprehensive
and
ultimately
deliver
a
complete
model
of
wayﬁnding
behavior. On the applied side, this understanding can inform
architectural planning, signage design, and the development
of digital devices such as mobile maps, both by translating
theoretical and empirical ﬁndings into design decisions, and
by providing an enriched simulation model for capacity
planning, building evaluation, etc. Crowd-level pedestrian
dynamics research (see Helbing et al., 2000; Moussaid et al.,
2009) as well as development of commercially available
simulation models has been focused on lower-level perceptual
and motoric phenomena. Currently such systems are very
successful at predicting navigation at the level of locomotion
rather than wayﬁnding. This includes avoiding collisions,
bypassing other slower people, forming lanes and crowd-
level congestion dynamics. Simulating wayﬁnding qualities
of buildings, neighborhoods, or signage/map systems would
require taking into account cognitive factors such as the
goals of the navigators, group membership, social relations,
and spatial mental representations
underlying wayﬁnding
decision-making.
We are led to conclude that contrary to the assumption
(whether implicit or explicit) underpinning the great majority
of the existing literature on wayﬁnding psychology (including
Wiener et al.’s taxonomy), wayﬁnding in many—perhaps
most—real-world cases has a critical social dimension to it.
“Asocial wayﬁnding” happens mostly in artiﬁcially controlled
situations, such as in psychology experiments or computational
models. When one considers the widespread adoption of
navigation assistants currently underway, at least in the
developed world, it is clear that navigation uninﬂuenced
by others is becoming even less common. Paradoxically,
this leads people to ask other people in the surrounds for
directions less and less, and to ignore people-as-cues more and
more.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
RD originally conceived of the main conceptual ideas and further
developed the theoretical framework in discussions with CH.
Later RD and CH joined with DM who had been working on
similar ideas in parallel, but independently. In general, this work
builds upon, and extends, previous work by all authors. All
authors contributed to the ﬁnal version of the manuscript.
FUNDING
Part funding provided by a Swiss National Science Foundation
grant:
WiSE:
Wayﬁnding
in
Social
Environments
SNF
100014_162428.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Iva Barisic, Tyler Thrash, and Verena Schnitzler for
suggesting relevant additional literature and examples of social
aspects of wayﬁnding, as well as for discussions on extensions of
the Wiener et al. wayﬁnding taxonomy.
REFERENCES
Aggarwal, I., and Wooley, A. W. (2013). Do you see what I see? The eﬀect of
members’ cognitive styles on team processes and errors in task execution.
Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 122, 92–99. doi: 10.1016/j.obhdp.2013.
04.003
Allen, G. L. (1997). “From knowledge to words to way ﬁnding: issues in the
production and comprehension of route directions,” in Spatial Information
Theory: A Theoretical Basis for GIS, eds S. C. Hurtle and A. U. Frank (Berlin:
Springer), 363–372.
Allen, G. L. (1999). “Spatial abilities, cognitive maps, and wayﬁnding,” in
Wayﬁnding Behavior: Cognitive Mapping and Other Spatial Processes, ed. R. G.
Golledge (Baltimore: JHU Press).
Bafna, S. (2003). Space syntax: a brief introduction to its logic and analytical
techniques.
Environ.
Behav.
35,
17–29.
doi:
10.1177/001391650223
8863
Berdahl, A., Westley, P. A., Levin, S. A., Couzin, I. D., and Quinn, T. P. (2016).
A collective navigation hypothesis for homeward migration in anadromous
salmonids. Fish Fish. 17, 525–542. doi: 10.1111/faf.12084
Bonner, B. L., and Bolinger, A. R. (2013). Separating the conﬁdent from the correct:
leveraging member knowledge in groups to improve decision making and
performance. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 122, 214–221. doi: 10.1016/
j.obhdp.2013.07.005
Bovy, P., and Stern, E. (1990). Route Choice: Wayﬁnding in Transportation
Networks. Dordrecht: Lower. doi: 10.1007/978-94-009-0633-4
Brennan, J. F. (2003). History and Systems of Psychology. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Bronzaft, A. L., Dobrow, S. B., and O’Hanlon, T. J. (1976). Spatial orientation in a
subway system. Environ. Behav. 8, 575–594. doi: 10.1177/001391657684005
Burte, H. (2004). Route Planning and Wayﬁnding by Dyads and Individuals. Thesis,
University of Alberta, Edmonton.
Carpman, J. R., and Grant, M. A. (2002). “Wayﬁnding: a broad view,” in Handbook
of Environmental Psychology, eds R. B. Bechtel and A. Churchman (New York,
NY: Wiley), 427–442.
Chebat, J. C., Gélinas-Chebat, C., and Therrien, K. (2005). Lost in a mall, the
eﬀects of gender, familiarity with the shopping mall and the shopping values
on shoppers’ wayﬁnding processes. J. Bus. Res. 58, 1590–1598. doi: 10.1016/j.
jbusres.2004.02.006
Conroy Dalton, R. (2003). The secret is to follow your nose: route path selection
and angularity. Environ. Behav. 35, 107–131. doi: 10.1177/0013916502238867
Cornell, E. H., Heth, C. D., and Rowat, W. L. (1992). Wayﬁnding by children and
adults: response to instructions to use look-back and retrace strategies. Dev.
Psychol. 28, 328–336. doi: 10.1037/0012-1649.28.2.328
Dalton, R. C., Troﬀa, R., Zacharias, J., and Hölscher, C. (2011). “Visual information
in the built environment and its eﬀect on wayﬁnding and explorative behavior,”
in Urban Diversities—Environmental and Social Issues, eds M. Bonito, M. Bones,
A. M. Nancy, and G. Cirrus (Cambridge, MA: Horace Publishing.), 67–76.
Davis, J. H. (1992). Group Decision Making. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Denis, M. (2018). Space and Spatial Cognition: A Multidisciplinary Perspective.
London: Routledge.
Denis, M., Pazzaglia, F., Cornoldi, C., and Bertolo, L. (1999). Spatial discourse
and navigation: an analysis of route directions in the city of Venice. Appl.
Cogn. Psychol. 13, 145–174. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1099-0720(199904)13:2<145::
AID-ACP550>3.0.CO;2-4
Ekstrom, A. D., Spiers, H. J., Bohbot, V. D., and Rosenbaum, R. S. (2018). Human
Spatial Navigation. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ellis, D. G., and Fisher, B. A. (1994). Small Group Decision Making: Communication
and the Group Process. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
12
February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 142


Dalton et al.
Wayﬁnding as a Social Activity
Faria, J. J., Codling, E. A., Dyer, J. R. G., Trillmich, F., and Krause, J. (2009).
Navigation in human crowds: testing the many-wrongs principle. Anim. Behav.
78, 587–591. doi: 10.1016/j.anbehav.2009.05.019
Forlizzi, J., Barley, W. C., and Seder, T. (2010). “Where should i turn: moving
from individual to collaborative navigation strategies to inform the interaction
design of future navigation systems,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New York, NY: ACM), 1261–1270.
doi: 10.1145/1753326.1753516
Frankenstein, J., Brüssow, S., Ruzzoli, F., and Hölscher, C. (2012). The language
of landmarks: the role of background knowledge in indoor wayﬁnding. Cogn.
Process. 13(Suppl. 1), 165–170. doi: 10.1007/s10339-012-0482-8
Galton, F. (1907). Vox populi (The wisdom of crowds). Nature 75, 450–451. doi:
10.2174/1745017901510011001
Gartner, G. (2011). “Emotional response to space as an additional concept
of supporting wayﬁnding in ubiquitous cartography,” in Mapping Diﬀerent
Geographies, eds K. Kriz, W. Cartwright, and L. Hurni (Berlin: Springer), 67–73.
Gartner, G. (2012). Putting Emotions in Maps–the Wayﬁnding Example. Linton:
Cartographic Society.
Goﬀman, E. (1971). Relations in Public: Microstudies of the Social Order. London:
Allen Lane.
Golledge, R. G. (ed.) (1999). Wayﬁnding Behavior: Cognitive Mapping and Other
Spatial Processes. Baltimore, MD: JHU press.
Haddington, P. (2012). Movement in action: initiating social navigation in cars.
Semiotic 191, 137–167. doi: 10.1515/sem-2012-0059
Haddington, P. (2013). “Action and space: navigation as a social and spatial task,”
in Space in Language and Linguistics: Geographical, Interactional, and Cognitive
Perspectives, eds P. Auer, M. Hilpert, A. Stukenbrock, and B. Szmrecsanyi
(Boston, MA: De Gruyter), 411–433.
Haghani, M., and Sarvi, M. (2017). Following the crowd or avoiding it? Empirical
investigation of imitative behavior in emergency escape of human crowds.
Anim. Behav. 124, 47–56. doi: 10.1016/j.anbehav.2016.11.024
He, G., Ishikawa, T., and Takemiya, M. (2015). Collaborative navigation in an
unfamiliar environment with people having diﬀerent spatial aptitudes. Spat.
Cogn. Comput. 15, 285–307. doi: 10.1080/13875868.2015.1072537
Hegarty, M., Richardson, A. E., Montello, D. R., Lovelace, K., and Subbiah, I.
(2002). Development of a self-report measure of environmental spatial ability.
Intelligence 30, 425–447. doi: 10.1016/S0160-2896(02)00116-2
Helbing, D., Farkas, I., and Vicsek, T. (2000). Simulating dynamical features of
escape panic. Nature 407, 487–490. doi: 10.1038/35035023
Helbing, D., Molnar, P., Farkas, I. J., and Bolay, K. (2001). Self-organizing
pedestrian movement. Environ. Plan. B Plan. Des. 28, 361–384. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0177328
Hill, G. W. (1982). Group versus individual performance: are n+1 heads better
than one? Psychol. Bull. 91:517. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.91.3.517
Hill, K. A. (2013). Wayﬁnding and spatial reorientation by Nova Scotia deer
hunters. Environ. Behav. 45, 267–282. doi: 10.1177/0013916511420421
Hillier, B., and Hanson, J. (1984). The Social Logic of Space. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511597237
Hölscher, C., Meilinger, T., Vrachiotis, G., Brösamle, M., and Knauﬀ, M. (2006).
Up the down staircase: wayﬁnding strategies in multi-level buildings. J. Environ.
Psychol. 26, 284–299. doi: 10.1016/j.jenvp.2006.09.002
Hölscher, C., Tenbrink, T., and Wiener, J. (2011). Would you follow your own route
description? Cognition 121, 228–247. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2011.06.005
Höök, K., Benyon, D., and Munro, A. J. (eds). (2003). Designing Information Spaces:
The Social Navigation Approach. New York, NY: Springer.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Kaplan, R. (1976). “Way-ﬁnding in the natural environment,” in Environmental
Knowing, eds G. T. Moore and R. G. Golledge (Stroudsburg, PA: Dowden,
Hutchinson & Ross), 46–57.
Klein, W. (1983). “Deixis and spatial orientation in route directions,” in Spatial
Orientation: Theory, Research, and Application, eds H. L. Pick and L. P. Acredolo
(New York, NY: Plenum Press), 283–311. doi: 10.1207/s15516709cog0202_3
Kuipers, B. (1978). Modeling spatial knowledge. Cogn. Sci. 2, 129–153.
doi: 10.1016/S0004-3702(00)00017-5
Kuipers, B. (2000). The spatial semantic hierarchy. Artif. Intell. 119, 191–233.
doi: 10.1139/f69-121
Larkin, P. A., and Walton, A. (1969). Fish school size and migration. J. Fish. Res.
Board Can. 26, 1372–1374.
Lovelace, K. L., Hegarty, M., and Montello, D. R. (1999). “Elements of
good route directions in familiar and unfamiliar environments,” in Spatial
Information Theory: Cognitive and Computational Foundations of Geographic
Information Science, eds C. Freksa and D. M. Mark (Berlin: Springer),
65–82.
MacEachren, A. M. (1995). How Maps Work: Representation, Visualization, and
Design. New York, NY: Guilford Press. doi: 10.1073/pnas.070039597
Maguire, E. A., David, G., Gadian, I. S., Johnsrude, C. D., John Ashburner, G.,
Richard, S. J., et al. (2000). Navigation-related structural change in the
hippocampi of taxi drivers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 4398–4403.
Mallot, H. A. (1999). Spatial cognition: behavioral competences, neural
mechanisms, and evolutionary scaling. Cogn. Sci. 8, 40–48. doi: 10.1016/0004-
3702(84)90045-6
McDermott, D., and Davis, E. (1984). Planning routes through uncertain territory.
Artif. Intell. 22, 107–156.
McNamara, T. P., Sluzenski, J., and Rump, B. (2008). “Human spatial
memory and navigation,” in Cognitive Psychology of Memory, Vol. 2, ed.
H. L. I. Roediger (Oxford: Elsevier), 157–178. doi: 10.1080/036402108020
67004
Meilinger, T., Knauﬀ, M., and Bülthoﬀ, H. H. (2008). Working memory in
wayﬁnding—A dual task experiment in a virtual city. Cogn. Sci. 32, 755–770.
doi: 10.1080/03640210802067004
Montello, D. R. (2001). “Spatial cognition,” in International Encyclopedia of
the Social & Behavioral Sciences, ed. J. Wright (Oxford: Pergamon Press),
14771–14775. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511610448.008
Montello, D. R. (2005). “Navigation,” in The Cambridge Handbook of Visuospatial
Thinking, eds P. Shah and A. Miyake (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press),
257–294. doi: 10.1177/0013916593253002
Montello, D. R., and Pick, H. L. (1993). Integrating knowledge of vertically-aligned
large-scale spaces. Environ. Behav. 25, 457–484.
Montello, D. R., and Sas, C. (2006). “Human factors of wayﬁnding in navigation,”
in International Encyclopedia of Ergonomics and Human Factors, 2nd Edn,
ed. W. Karwowski (London: CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, Ltd), 2003–2008.
doi: 10.1111/j.1756-8765.2009.01028.x
Moussaid, M., Garnier, S., Theraulaz, G., and Helbing, D. (2009). Collective
information processing and pattern formation in swarms, ﬂocks, and crowds.
Top. Cogn. Sci. 1, 469–497. doi: 10.1111/j.1756-8765.2009.01028.x
Munro, A., Höök, K., and Benyon, D. (1999). “Footprints in the snow,”
in Social Navigation of Information Space, Eds A. J. Munro, K. Höök,
and
D.
Benyon
(London:
Springer),
1–14.
doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2017.
00763
Palmiero, M., and Piccardi, L. (2017). The role of emotional landmarks on
topographical memory. Front. Psychol. 8:763. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00763
Passini, R. (1981). Wayﬁnding: a conceptual framework. Urban Ecol. 5,
17–31.
Passini, R. (1992). Wayﬁnding in Architecture, 2nd Edn. New York, NY: Van
Nostrand Reinhold Company. doi: 10.1177/0013916590225001
Peponis, J., Zimring, C., and Choi, Y. K. (1990). Finding the building in wayﬁnding.
Environ. Behav. 22, 555–590. doi: 10.1068/p260301
Péruch, P., May, M., and Wartenberg, F. (1997). Homing in virtual environments:
eﬀects of ﬁeld of view and path layout. Perception 26, 301–311.
Raubal, M. (2001). Human wayﬁnding in unfamiliar buildings: a simulation
with a cognizing agent. Cogn. Process. 2–3, 363–388. doi: 10.1007/s00779-008-
0207-2
Reilly,
D.,
Mackay,
B.,
Watters,
C.,
and
Inkpen,
K.
(2009).
Planners,
navigators, and pragmatists: collaborative wayﬁnding using a single mobile
phone. Pers. Ubiquitous Comput. 13, 321–329. doi: 10.1037/1076-898X.3.
2.143
Ruddle, R. A., Payne, S. J., and Jones, D. M. (1997). Navigating buildings in
’desk-top’ virtual environments: experimental investigations using extended
navigational experience. J. Exp. Psychol. Appl. 3, 143–159. doi: 10.1007/s00426-
018-1015-6
Ruotolo, F., Claessen, M. H. G., and van der Ham, I. J. M. (2018). Putting emotions
in routes: the inﬂuence of emotionally laden landmarks on spatial memory.
Psychol. Res. doi: 10.1007/s00426-018-1015-6 [Epub ahead of print]. doi: 10.
1016/j.tree.2004.07.001
Simons, A. M. (2004). Many wrongs: the advantage of group navigation. Trends
Ecol. Evol. 19, 453–455. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2017.06.2169
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
13
February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 142


Dalton et al.
Wayﬁnding as a Social Activity
Spiers, H., Manley, E., Silva, R., Dalton, R., Wiener, J., Hoelscher, C., et al.
(2017). Population-level spatial navigation ability to detect and predict
Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 13:1404. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2017.
06.2169
Steck, S. D., and Mallot, H. A. (2000). The role of global and local landmarks in
virtual environment navigation. Presence 9, 69–83.
Sternberg, R. J., and Ben-Zeev, T. (2001). Complex Cognition: The Psychology of
Human Thought. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Swap, W. C. (1984). Group Decision Making. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
doi: 10.1177/0013916506296201
Tougne, J., Paty, B., Meynard, D., Martin, J.-M., Letellier, T., and Rosnet, E. (2008).
Group problem solving and anxiety during a simulated mountaineering ascent.
Environ. Behav. 40, 3–23. doi: 10.1037/a0032540
Van Doesum, N. J., Van Lange, D. A., and Van Lange, P. A. (2013). Social
mindfulness: skill and will to navigate the social world. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 105,
86–103. doi: 10.1037/a0032540
Weisman, J. (1981). Evaluating architectural legibility: way-ﬁnding in the built
environment. Environ. Behav. 13, 189–204. doi: 10.1080/13875860902906496
Wiener, J. M., Büchner, S. J., and Hölscher, C. (2009). Taxonomy of human
wayﬁnding tasks: a knowledge-based approach. Spat. Cogn. Comput. 9,
152–165.
Wunderlich, D., and Reinelt, R. (1982). “How to get there from here,” in Speech,
Place, and Action, Vol. 1, eds F. J. Jarvella and W. Klein (New York, NY: John
Wiley & Sons Ltd), 183–201. doi: 10.1016/S0004-3702(98)00111-8
Yeap, W. K., and Jeﬀeries, M. E. (1999). Computing a representation of the local
environment. Artif. Intell. 107, 265–301. doi: 10.1006/jevp.2001.0225
Zacharias, J. (2001). Path choice and visual stimuli: signs of human activity and
architecture. J. Environ. Psychol. 21, 341–352.
Zeisel, J. (1981). Inquiry by Design: Tools for Environment-Behavior Research.
Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole Publishing.
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Dalton, Hölscher and Montello. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org
14
February 2019 | Volume 10 | Article 142


