This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
1
Road Scene Content Analysis for Driver Assistance
and Autonomous Driving
Melih Altun, Member, IEEE, and Mehmet Celenk, Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper aims to develop a vision-based driver
assistance system for
scene awareness
using video frames
obtained from a dashboard camera. A saliency image map
is devised with features pertinent to the driving scene. This
saliency map mimics the human contour and motion sensitive
visual perception by extracting spatial, spectral, and temporal
information from the input frames and applying entropy driven
image-context-feature data fusion. The resultant fusion output
comprises high-level descriptors for still segment boundaries and
non-stationary object appearance. Following the segmentation
and foreground object detection stage, an adaptive maximum
likelihood classiﬁer selects road surface regions. The proposed
scene driven vision system improves the driver’s situational
awareness by enabling adaptive road surface classiﬁcation.
As experimental results demonstrate, context-aware low-level to
high-level information fusion based on human vision model pro-
duces superior segmentation, tracking, and classiﬁcation results
that lead to high- level abstraction of driving scene.
Index Terms—Road scene, content analysis, saliency map,
entropy-driven context-feature fusion.
I. INTRODUCTION
S
CENE understanding has found growing applications
in intelligent transportation with driver assistance and
autonomous driving systems. Presently, there are many auto-
mobile models with driver assistance systems such as park-
ing assistance, lane departure warnings, emergency brake
assistance, adaptive cruise control, etc. [1], leading toward
the development of autonomous vehicles and transportation.
These vehicles are equipped with various different sensors
including global positioning system (GPS), radio detection and
ranging (Radar), and light detection and ranging (LIDAR).
Autonomous cars are being designed in a manner that they can
communicate with other autonomous vehicles in their vicinity
and, in turn, form underlying sensor networks [2].
Intelligent vehicles’ research has started more than two
decades ago and it has rapidly grown in the last ﬁfteen years.
Majority of intelligent vehicle research in the literature is in
line with the current autonomous vehicle design trends, which
involve multiple sensors and associated networks. Studies such
as [3] and [4] provide frameworks for combining a variety
of sensors such as LIDAR, radar, and GPS. Detection rate
in drivers’ surrounding can beneﬁt from using a variety of
Manuscript received April 10, 2016; revised November 26, 2016 and
February 24, 2017; accepted March 15, 2017. The Associate Editor for this
paper was J. Zhang.
The authors are with Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701 USA (e-mail:
celenk@ohio.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TITS.2017.2688352
sensors in expense of higher costs as the number of built in
sensors increases. These sensors usually work independently
from each other and they generate warnings and notiﬁcations
at different time instances. Wagh et al. [5] argue that some
of these notiﬁcations may not be of much signiﬁcance for the
driver and proposes a sensor data fusion method that generates
more informative warnings and notiﬁcations. Works such
as [6] and [7] focus on sensor networks and multivehicle coop-
erative driving. Such approaches enable trajectory planning
to avoid collision. However, researchers in [1] contemplate
that, with vehicles and sensors being produced by various
manufacturers, sensor interoperability will be a challenge for
sensor networks. Some computer vision methods detect and
track objects such as moving vehicles [8]–[11] with varying
degrees of success. Others including [12] and [13] detect and
track road lines, pedestrians [14] and trafﬁc lights [15].
Substantial studies have been published on segmentation
and scene understanding. However, few of them focus on
feature fusion and incorporation of temporal attributes. For
instance, the approach in [16] uses fusion of directional spatial
features such as eigenvectors, gradients and temporal saliency
for vehicle detection from air. In [15], optical ﬂow and a pixel
based similarity metric are utilized to segment road scenes.
Work in [16] also utilizes optical ﬂow for trafﬁc analysis using
a ﬁxed camera directed at an intersection. Color clustering
and local binary patterns as a texture descriptor are employed
for road scene segmentation in [17]. The method presented
in [18] outputs large feature vectors using motion boundary
histograms to classify road scenes. Some of these methods
such as the latter case would be inefﬁcient for video processing
due to the size of their feature space. The approach undertaken
in [19] makes use of texture anisotropy as a feature for
detecting road segments. They combine multiple pixels into
large super pixels to reduce complexity.
Previous works explored combining pairs of these three
information sources such as spatial and spectral [17], spa-
tial and
temporal [14] or spectral and temporal [15].
There are also methods that integrate texture and motion
with color information which is a spatial-temporal spectral
feature [20], [21]. These methods use structural tensors to
extract texture and motion information and attempt to segment
the image based on feature vectors obtained for all pixels.
These are parametric models and they require a-priori infor-
mation such as number of segments and class means. These
requirements make unsupervised clustering a difﬁcult task.
In most cases, they can only segment the image into two
regions. Furthermore, none of the previously applied fusion
1556-6013 © 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
methods are based on a human perception model. The fusion
result of our work emulates the visual stimulus formed by the
retinal receptor layer in order to yield better segmentation and
scene understanding by utilizing all three visual information
cues: spatial, spectral and temporal.
Despite the promising progress in autonomous vehicular
technology, humans are still largely in control of operating
vehicles using their eyes to perceive the surrounding envi-
ronment and to encapsulate the driving scenery through all
visually available information as a whole entity. Therefore,
a camera only system should be able to extract context from
scenery in a similar manner without needing extra sensors, if it
utilizes all available visual information.
Human eyes are able to cluster similar colors and intensities
in spontaneous vision. Neurons connected to receptors that
receive similar hue and intensity levels ﬁre at the same rate and
what captures our attention the most are the transitions in color
and intensity. The regions with high contrast form the region
boundaries or contours of an object. The importance of con-
tours in human perception can be conceded from the tendency
of drawing the contours ﬁrst when asked to sketch an object.
This phenomenon was ﬁrst observed by Ernst Mach. Accord-
ing to his theory, the perceived image is the actual image
minus the Laplacian of the image multiplied with a coefﬁcient.
This has a sharpening effect on the perceived image [22].
In fact, ﬁnding zero crossings of an image Laplacian is an
effective edge detection method in image processing literature.
Humans also detect textures and texture changes easily. One
of the most signiﬁcant works on texture segmentation [23]
lists texture components as periodicity, directionality, and
randomness. When our eyes detect small changes in contrast
in a periodic, directional or random manner, we recognize that
as a texture. Over a large region these contrast changes add
up and become easy to recognize. Although texture properties
are mainly spectral rather than spatial, our perception clusters
textures the same way it clusters color and intensity, and ﬁnds
boundaries between different textures. Boundaries of textures
are added to our contour vision.
Another observational cue emphasized frequently in human
vision is motion. There are tracking neurons in visual system
that ﬁre upon detection of motion. The faster the observed
object moves the more exhibited these neurons become [22].
This explains why moving objects immediately catch our
attention.
Detected contours from colors, intensity, texture, and motion
are synthesized to become our visual stimulus. The combined
output of these visual features forms a map showing where
most of our attention focuses in a scene. Continuous long
curves in this map depict the boundaries of regions, whereas
blobs with high concentration of contours or motion deﬁne
foreground objects.
With computer vision methods, similar to human eye, spec-
tral (color, intensity) and spatial-spectral (texture) information
can be extracted. Moreover, motion detection algorithms such
as optical ﬂow can ﬁnd temporal changes similar to the tracker
neurons in our eyes. When these data are combined using
the image fusion methods mentioned earlier, the result is a
saliency map [24] showing object and region contours as
well as objects in motion. This saliency map models the
visual stimulus after synthesis of spatial, spectral and temporal
information. By using the contours in the saliency map, better
semantic information can be captured. In turn, visually distinct
semantically meaningful regions in an image can be captured
as a result of the gross overall segmentation of the scene being
processed.
The proposed system is able to identify road surface and
background as well as the foreground objects. It is a vision
only approach as opposed to other methods that rely on other
sensors such as LIDAR. Segmentation of context descriptive
objects is achieved herein by combining low level spatial,
spectral and temporal data obtained from video stream into
higher level descriptors. An error minimizing method ensures
high accuracy and robust detection even under adverse condi-
tions such as very low SNR. Utilization of such camera only
systems that uses all available visual information, simpliﬁes
the implementation of intelligent cars and driver assistance
framework.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
In section II, details of the proposed information fusion system
is explained. In section III, the results are presented. The last
chapter contains conclusions and future work.
II. PROPOSED VISUAL INFORMATION FUSION METHOD
In computer science terms, incorporating data from multiple
sources into a single output is called information fusion or data
fusion [25], [26]. The purpose of data fusion is to generate
information that surpasses the individual sources used for
fusion. Image fusion methods ﬁnd applications in military tar-
get detection and tracking [27], surveillance [28], [29], remote
sensing [30], medical imaging [31], etc. Fusion needs a basis,
which is a set of shared attributes used as a guide to merge
the information content into one meaningful representation.
Among other methods [25], fusion can be based on entropy,
fuzzy logic, wavelets and principal component analysis results.
Image fusion involves images obtained from two or more
different sources.
In this study, fusion operation is carried out with images
obtained from a single camera. Each video frame goes through
three different analysis procedures, namely, spatial, spectral
and temporal analysis. These analysis procedures produce
various low level image features such as color clustering,
local variance, texture energy, and optical ﬂow. In order to
produce an image with higher information content, these low-
level features are combined in such a way that the images
with higher information contents are assigned higher weights.
A sample frame sequence used for feature extraction is given
in Fig. 1.
A. Extraction of Spatial-Domain Information
Spatial features are obtained by analyzing the video frames
based on color and intensity. The ﬁrst step in extracting spatial
information is by ﬁnding pixels with similar colors and cluster-
ing them. In order to group pixels of similar color into clusters,
a fast clustering algorithm needs to be formulated. Although
k-Means Clustering [32] is a commonly used method, selection


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ALTUN AND CELENK: ROAD SCENE CONTENT ANALYSIS FOR DRIVER ASSISTANCE AND AUTONOMOUS DRIVING
3
Fig. 1.
Original image sequence.
Fig. 2.
Color clustering and cluster contours.
of optimal number of clusters (k) requires multiple calls to
this method, which increases computational workload. Instead,
a fast converging histogram based thresholding method is
adopted in this work. The selected clustering method is a
variation of work presented in [33]. Having this method as a
base, the Otsu threshold is iterated recursively over the image
histogram in process. In this strategy, Otsu’s method [34]
ﬁnds an optimal threshold and divides the image into a dark
and a light class pattern. The optimal threshold is selected in
such a way that it minimizes the within the cluster deviation
and maximizes the between class scatter value. Each time a
histogram is separated into a lower and a higher histogram
variable range, the Otsu algorithm is called on these lower
and higher histograms and the segment is divided into further
smaller segments until termination conditions occur. Results of
color clustering applied to sample frame can be seen in Fig 2.
Local variance appears to be a strong contour descriptor.
In regions where image intensity changes abruptly, local vari-
ance is much higher as compared to uniform regions. Although
local variance is listed as a spatial feature, it also contains some
texture information. In uniform image regions local variance is
close to zero. In regions with texture, local variance has high
value due to the variations in pixel intensities. In that sense,
it can be considered as a hybrid feature but the contributions
from edges are much higher than the contributions from
texture. Fig.3 depicts the local variance of the sample scene.
B. Extraction of Spectral-Domain Information
A possible approach to localize different textures is to
ﬁnd different energy levels in local regions, which can be
carried out via one of the methods for computing image
energies. Transform energies are chosen in this research due to
their easy and fast calculation. Parseval’s theorem and energy
relationship of cosine transform indicate that signal energy is
preserved after discrete Fourier transform (DFT) and discrete
cosine transform (DCT) [35]. Moreover, by separating the DC
component, energy due to gray level intensities can be ignored
and energy due to transitions can be detained. Fig. 4 shows the
result of texture based gross overall road scene segmentation
toward context manifestation.
Fig. 3.
Local variance.
Fig. 4.
Texture features from local cosine transform energy, clusters based
on texture and their contours.
C. Extraction of Temporal Information With Optical Flow
Temporal analysis is performed by calculating the optical
ﬂow of video sequence. Optical ﬂow is a powerful tool
for detecting motion in a video. Regions containing moving
objects in video frames can be identiﬁed with optical ﬂow.
In addition to motion detection, the direction and magnitude of
the motion can be calculated with optical ﬂow. Many methods
have been proposed for computation of optical ﬂow [36]–[38].
For real time performance constraint, we devise a method
with low computational cost, which is similar to the approach
for optical ﬂow proposed in [39]. Figure 5 demonstrates the
optical ﬂow output of sample frames given in Fig. 1.
D. Information Fusion
The process of combining multiple sources of data into
a more informative form is called data fusion. When these
data sources are images, the process is called image data
fusion or image fusion in short. There are various approaches
for fusion [25]. In view of context aware scene partitioning in
the domain of spatial, spectral and temporal image attributes,
the approach undertaken in this research is feature level fusion.
In selection of the fusion method, ideally the features with
higher information must have more contribution to the fused
output compared to other features with less information. In this
work, starting with two images I1 and I2, we combine the
associated information of I1 and I2 by scaling one of them in
such a way that the fusion outcome emphasizes their common
information.
Let us assume that two inputs X and Y have common
information and information exclusive to one of them (i.e.,
mutual information and conditional entropy). Starting with two
sources, if we want to emphasize the redundant information in
our fused output, we maximize mutual information, namely,
HM(X, Y). If we want to emphasize information speciﬁc to
individual sources, we need to maximize the union of the
conditional entropies; i.e., H(X|Y)UH(Y|X) where U is the
union. This suggests that mutual information between images
that represent different features should be maximized to ﬁnd
the best combination of those images.


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
Fig. 5. Optical ﬂow of the 2 frame sequence. Notice the color wheel indicates
direction and saturation represents magnitude of motion.
Assume that there are two inputs with the histograms shown
in Fig. 6. The fused image will be combination of the two:
I f = aI 1 + bI 2
(1)
Finding optimal I f becomes equivalent to ﬁnding the ratio of
a and b coefﬁcients for I1 and I2. Since the output will be
normalized, this can be further reduced to:
I f = αI 1 + I2
(2)
Next, we need to select which of the two inputs should
be scaled. Mutual information will be maximum when the
two images are most similar, which, in most cases, means
when their histograms are most similar. In the selected case
without losing generality, I1 has more variance compared to I2.
Therefore, we can pick α < 1 and use it to scale I1 and shrink
its histogram or we can pick α > 1 and use it to stretch the
histogram of I2. If we use α > 1, then some of the pixels in I2
will be scaled beyond the maximum brightness level allowed.
We are going to either lose those pixels or limit them to the
maximum attainable value (e.g., 1 or 255). Either case will
introduce non-linearity and result in information loss. Thus,
we should select α < 1 and scale I1 (the one with the larger
variance) to shrink its histogram and make it look like I2. Our
aim is to maximize mutual information HM(αI1, I2 ) with
respect to α. Hence,
∂
∂α HM (αI1, I2) = 0
(3)
∂
∂α

i1

i2 p (αI1, I2)log2
p (αI1, I2)
p (αI1) p (I2) = 0
(4)
where p(αI1, I2) is the joint histogram of two images. If we
go through the math from here, we would see that ﬁnding a 2D
distribution as a function of I1 and I2 without loss of generality
is quite difﬁcult. Moreover, as Eqn. (5) shows, multivariate
mutual information calculation is complicated.
HM (I1, . . . , IN ) = HM (I1, . . . , IN−1)
−HM (I1, . . . , IN−1|IN)
(5)
To mitigate the underlined complications, we utilize the
mean square error (MSE) between feature maps. In [40],
it is stated that there is a differential relation between mutual
information and minimum MSE. The same reference [40]
investigates input and output of transmission channels with
Gaussian noise. Although the analysis is pertinent to a subject
area, there are considerable similarities and they basically
claim mutual information and MSE become very relevant.
Fig. 6.
Two sample histograms.
They derive the equations below which deﬁne the relation
between MSE and mutual information.
d
dSN R HM (X, Y) = 1
2 MSE (X|Y)
(6)
HM (X, Y) = 1
2
 snr
0
MSE (γ ) dγ
(7)
What is claimed in this research is, for a speciﬁc scaling
factor, the difference between two images to be fused needs
to be minimal. Consequently, the redundancy between images
should be maximized.
I2 = α∗I1 + Error
(8)
In accordance with the approach in [40], given an input X a
communication channel and an output Y, output will be some
noise plus X scaled by signal to noise ratio (SNR).
Y =
√
SN RX + N
(9)
The two approaches are parallel in this aspect. Therefore, min-
imizing MSE between feature map histograms can generate
similar results to mutual information approach.
MSE = 1
T
 1
k=0
[pαI1 (k) −pI2 (k)]2 dk
(10)
We can model probability distributions as Gaussian mixtures
and set T = 1 since histograms are normalized:
MSE =
 1
k=0
×

iciN (k|αμi, ασi) −

jd jN

k|μ j, σ j
2
dk
(11)
Now, we minimize MSE w.r.t. α, subject to 
i ci = 1 and

j d j = 1.
∂
∂α
 1
k=0
⎡
⎣
i
ciN (k|αμi, ασi) −

j
d jN k|μ j, σ j

⎤
⎦
2
dk
−λ1
∂
∂α

i ci −1

−λ2
∂
∂α

j d j −1

= 0
(12)
Notice that the constraints are not dependent on α so they
drop out. Also, note that the second Gaussian mixture is not
dependent on α as well.
 1
k=0
∂
∂α

iciN (k|αμi, ασi)−

jd jN

k|μ j, σ j
2
dk = 0
(13)
Replacing Gaussian mixtures with the symbol G yields:
 1
k=0
∂
∂α [G1 (k, α) −G2 (k)]
2
dk = 0
(14)


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ALTUN AND CELENK: ROAD SCENE CONTENT ANALYSIS FOR DRIVER ASSISTANCE AND AUTONOMOUS DRIVING
5
Eqn. (14) becomes (15) when chain rule is applied.
 1
k=0
2 [G1 (k, α) −G2 (k)] ∂
∂α G1 (k, α) dk = 0
(15)
This suggests two solutions:
[G1 (k, α) −G2 (k)] = 0
(16)
or
 1
k=0
∂
∂α G1 (k, α) dk = 0
(17)
Eqn. (16) dictates that G1 and G2 are identical, which is highly
unlikely. Solving Eqn. (17) is more likely to produce results.
Eqn. (17) is sufﬁcient for computational evaluation. However,
it can be expanded to (18):
 1
k=0
∂
∂α

i ci
1
ασi
√
2π
exp

−1
2
k −αμi
σi
2
dk = 0
(18)
Eqn. (19) is obtained when (18) is solved for the partial
derivative of α.
 1
k=0

i ci
−1
α4σ 3
i
√
2π
exp

−1
2
k −αμi
σi
2
·

α2σ 2
i + αkμi −k2
dk = 0
(19)
The ﬁrst part of Eqn. (19) is a set of scaled Gaussians. Due
to the negative sign it is negative for all values of α.
−ci
α4σ 3
i
√
2π
exp

−0.5
k −αμi
σi
2
< 0
(20)
which leads to:
 1
k=0

i

α2σ 2
i + αkμi −k2
dk = 0
(21)
This is an alternative to Eqn. (17). That is, Gaussians can be
ﬁtted to histogram data and α can be directly calculated. For
a single Gaussian α evaluates to:
α = μk ±

μ2 + 4σ 2
2σ
(22)
The histograms of the features we extracted are indeed uni-
modal almost all the experiments undertaken. By interpreting
the mean and variance, α can be computed. Setting partial
derivative w.r.t α to zero will give us the critical points; i.e.,
α∗. Local minima are negative to positive zero crossings of
the ﬁrst derivative at α∗location.
To demonstrate the feature fusion method, it is applied to
two feature maps extracted from the sample frames given
in Fig. 1. Figs. 7 and 8 depict the features used for fusion.
Since I1 has greater variance, it is scaled with alpha coef-
ﬁcient to match I2 histogram. The plot in Fig. 9 shows MSE
of their histograms versus alpha:
Fig. 9 and Fig 10. show MSE and mutual information are
closely related as it is claimed by the derivations. The peaks
in HM vs. α plot correspond to the local minimums of the
MSE vs. α plot. By selecting the minimum MSE generating
Fig. 7.
Local variance of sample frame and its histogram taken as I1.
Fig. 8.
Color cluster contours and its histogram taken as I2.
Fig. 9.
MSE{p(α I1)| p(I2) } vs. α.
Fig. 10.
HM(α I1, I2) vs. α.
α we can ﬁnd the optimal ratio that generates the highest
information content.
The example demonstrates how the two images are com-
bined by ﬁnding an optimal scaling coefﬁcient. However,
we combine more than two images. As mentioned earlier, this
would complicate operational procedures if mutual informa-
tion was used for fusion. With the minimum MSE approach,
we keep the image with smaller variance constant and scale
the intensity of the other image. By extending this approach,
we can select the image with the minimum variance (among
local variance, colors, optical ﬂow, spectral energy, etc.) and
ﬁnd a scaling factor for the others.


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
Fig. 11. Fused Saliency image and segmentation result after region separation
and growing.
Fig. 12.
Overall feature extraction and fusion.
This, in turn, gives a scaling rate (α∗) for each feature map
and the scaling rate for the one with the minimum variance
will be 1. The fused image can be given by
I f = Imin_var +

i αi · Ii
(23)
where Ii ̸= Imin_var.
Resulting fused image obtained from the combined saliency
features is illustrated in Fig. 11. Fig.12 depicts overall feature
extraction and fusion scheme. Notice that the colors of regions
are assigned arbitrarily and do not signify any meaning.
III. RESULTS
A. Road Surface Detection
A set of experiments was carried out on a data set from [41].
Some video frames in this dataset are manually segmented to
form a ground truth for validation. Although this sort of ground
truth formation can be considered subjective, as long as sub-
jects who do the segmentation abide certain set of rules based
on their spontaneous vision, results will be consistent with
small variations within statistical error margins. The ground
TABLE I
ROAD DETECTION ACCURACY RESULTS
Fig. 13. Sample frames (row 1), their saliency (row 2), segmentation (row 3),
road detection (row 4), ground truth (row 5), ground truth of road surface (row
6) and comparison of road detection to ground truth(row 7).
truth images are color coded. Purple tones indicate road and
lane markings. Red regions are used for buildings, yellow
is for vegetation, and gray is for the sky. By searching the
purple colors on the ground truth images, road surfaces can
be reached as the driving platform.
The images segmented with our method do not have such
color coding. Colors only indicate label numbers which are
arbitrary. The road surfaces are found by a maximum likeli-
hood classiﬁer using ontological features. These ontological
features include properties such as shape, position and color.
For instance, road is expected to be seen on the bottom half of
the image. Therefore, position becomes an important indicator.
Also, roads are in general straight or curved segments, warped
by the visual perspective. Hence, we can use shapes as another
important ontological feature for road surface detection.
Class models are constantly updated by new features.
Emphasis of older features on class models is reduced over
time in order to achieve adaptive learning.


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ALTUN AND CELENK: ROAD SCENE CONTENT ANALYSIS FOR DRIVER ASSISTANCE AND AUTONOMOUS DRIVING
7
Fig. 14. Sample frames (row 1), their saliency (row 2), segmentation (row 3),
road detection (row 4), ground truth (row 5), ground truth of road sur-
face (row 6) and comparison of road detection to ground truth (row 7).
Fig. 15.
Segmentation and road detection results of original image
(1st
column)
and
images
degraded
with
Gaussian
noise
(images
in
columns 2, 3 and 4).
Figs. 13 and 14 demonstrate the results obtained from the
aforementioned dataset, which contains four different video
sequences. Two sample frames from each are shown here. The
ﬁrst row is the input scene. The second row is the saliency
frame extracted with the new information fusion method. The
3rd row is the segmentation result. The 4th row contains the
extracted road surface from segmented image. The next row
shows the ground truth for the input frame. It is followed
Fig. 16.
Segmentation and road detection results of samples degraded with
Gaussian noise (images in columns 2, 3, and 4).
Fig. 17.
Segmentation and road detection results of samples degraded with
Gaussian noise (images in columns 2, 3, and 4).
by the road surface extracted from the ground truth. The last
overlays road detection results on top of road surface ground
truth images.
The accuracy of road detection is obtained by comparing the
road elements in ground truth image (road and lane markers) to
the extracted road surface from segmentation image. Measured
accuracy is given by
DetectionAccuracy =
1
M N
M−1
i=0
N−1
j=0 f (i, j)
(24)
where M and N are image dimension and f is expressed as:
f (i, j) =

1, if IR (i, j) = IG (i, j)
0, otherwise
(25)
Here, IR is the segmented road binary image and IG is the
ground truth for road surface. Accuracy measurements are
taken for a series of frames in each video and averaged to
give the overall accuracy. Table I summarizes the road surface
extraction accuracy on four videos.
As seen in Figs. 13 and 14, the detected road surfaces
(4th row) and ground truth (6th row) show great resemblance.


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
Fig. 18.
Accuracy of road detections versus image SNR.
The last row demonstrates the segmentation results and ground
truth overlaid. White regions are the parts marked as road on
both segmented image and ground truth. Black regions are
the non-road segments in both images. The gray parts show
mismatches. The gray regions constitute a very small part of
the entire overlaid image.
B. Noise Immunity Measurements
To measure how well the method performs under noisy
conditions, we introduced pseudo Gaussian noise into a sam-
ple frame and measured segmentation accuracy with varying
degrees of noise. Total of 11 copies of the original frame
are created with progressively worsening noise. There is
approximately 5 dB SNR drop on each example. Figs.15–17
display the frames in question and segmentation results along
with the comparison to ground truth. The ﬁrst image is the
original frame, followed by noisy frames. The second row is
the segmentation and the 3rd row is the road surface detection
result. The last row compares road extraction to the ground
truth.
Each test image except for the ﬁrst one is degraded by a
Gaussian white noise of varying strength. The signal to noise
ratio (SNR) is calculated by
SN R = 10log10
 PS
PN

(26)
where PN and PS represent noise and signal power, respec-
tively. Signal power is given by the mean square of the image
intensity.
PS =
1
M N
M−1
i=0
N−1
j=0 I 2(i, j)
(27)
For a zero mean Gaussian noise, its power is given by its
variance:
PN = var (N) = σ 2
N
(28)
Fig. 18 and Table II show the SNR of each noisy frame and
the respective accuracy of road detection on these frames.
TABLE II
NOISE IMMUNITY RESULTS
Image 1 and its reduced SNR versions listed in Table II are
shown in Fig. 15 through Fig. 17. As the results indicate,
even with a 50dB overall drop in SNR, accuracy decreases
only by about 25%. There are some variations in accuracy
due to random nature of noise. However, these ﬂuctuations and
overall drop in accuracy is small. Even when the segmentation
suffers from extreme noise injected into the frames, the road
surface extraction is still generating plausible perception
results.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The motivation behind this research is to cohesively inte-
grate multiple approaches for an image context understanding
problem effectively with robust performance. The proposed
method stems from the human visual perception of a scene in
its spatial, spectral and temporal attributes as a whole entity.
To this end, instead of using one source, we can combine all of
the available information yielding better results in mimicking
human perception and cognition. In turn, this beneﬁts com-
puter vision and machine learning systems as demonstrated
throughout the work presented herein. Forming an approach to
a problem based on the conﬂicts and agreements of different
methods can generate solutions that are much more general
than solutions obtained with a single method. The research
aims formation of a computer vision approach that produces
higher level image descriptors by fusing low level image
features together. These high-level descriptors can close the
semantic gap in image understanding problems. Utilization of
high level features lead to better segmentation, better track-
ing and eventually better scene understanding. Experimental
results of this work indicate mimicking human vision to
achieve a computer vision based driver assistance system pro-
duces very promising results. Presented results demonstrate the


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ALTUN AND CELENK: ROAD SCENE CONTENT ANALYSIS FOR DRIVER ASSISTANCE AND AUTONOMOUS DRIVING
9
effectiveness of combining multiple visual features together
in order to acquire more informative features. As the ground
truth comparisons indicate, the road surface detection accuracy
is over 90%. Moreover, the proposed method performs well
under noise, not losing much accuracy even after SNR drops
of 50dB.
All experimentation in this research is carried out with
daytime driving videos. As a future work, the algorithm
presented here will be extended toward nighttime driving
scenarios. Integration of infrared cameras can further improve
the nighttime performance of the system. Another possible
extension is the use of stereo cameras to obtain depth percep-
tion. Stereo vision can signiﬁcantly increase the information
content of the video frames.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Li, J. Song, F.-Y. Wang, W. Niehsen, and N.-N. Zheng, “IVS 05:
New developments and research trends for intelligent vehicles,” IEEE
Intell. Syst., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 10–14, Jul./Aug. 2005.
[2] M. M. Nabeel, M. F. El-Deen, and S. El-Kader, “Intelligent vehicle
recognition based on wireless sensor network,” Int. J. Comput. Sci.,
vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 164–174, 2013.
[3] M. Bertozzi et al., “GOLD: A framework for developing intelligent-
vehicle vision applications,” IEEE Intell. Syst., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 69–71,
Jan./Feb. 2008.
[4] T. X. P. Diem and M. Pasquier, “From operational to tactical driving:
A hybrid learning approach for autonomous vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE
10th Int. Conf. Control, Autom., Robot. Vis. (ICARC), vol. 8. Dec. 2008,
pp. 285–290.
[5] A. Wagh, X. Li, J. Wan, C. Qiao, and C. Wu, “Human centric
data fusion in vehicular cyber-physical systems,” in Proc. IEEE Conf.
Comput. Commun. Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Apr. 2011,
pp. 684–689.
[6] C. Garcia-Costa, E. Egea-Lopez, J. B. Tomas-Gabarron, J. Garcia-Haro,
and Z. J. Haas, “A stochastic model for chain collisions of vehicles
equipped with vehicular communications,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 503–518, Jun. 2012.
[7] H.-S. Tan and J. Huang, “DGPS-based vehicle-to-vehicle cooperative
collision warning: Engineering feasibility viewpoints,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 415–428, Dec. 2006.
[8] M. B. Van Leeuwen and F. C. A. Groen, “Vehicle detection with a
mobile camera: Spotting midrange, distant, and passing cars,” IEEE
Robot. Autom. Mag., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 37–45, Mar. 2005.
[9] X. Clady, F. Collange, F. Jurie, and P. Martinet, “Object tracking with
a pan-tilt-zoom camera: Application to car driving assistance,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., vol. 2. 2001, pp. 1653–1658.
[10] S. Nedevschi et al., “A sensor for urban driving assistance systems based
on dense stereovision,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp., Jun. 2007,
pp. 276–283.
[11] G. Lefaix, T. Marchand, and P. Bouthemy, “Motion-based obstacle
detection and tracking for car driving assistance,” in Proc. 16th Int.
Conf. Pattern Recognit., vol. 4. 2002, pp. 74–77.
[12] A. Amditis et al., “A situation-adaptive lane-keeping support system:
Overview of the SAFELANE approach,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 617–629, Sep. 2010.
[13] A. Polychronopoulos, C. Koutsimanis, M. Tsogas, and A. Amdi-
tis, “Prediction of unintentional lane departure using evidence the-
ory,” in Proc. IEEE 8th Int. Conf. Inf. Fusion, vol. 2. Jul. 2005,
pp. 1396–1403.
[14] X. Zhao, Z. He, S. Zhang, and D. Liang, “Robust pedestrian detection
in thermal infrared imagery using a shape distribution histogram feature
and modiﬁed sparse representation classiﬁcation,” Pattern Recognit.,
vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1947–1960, 2015.
[15] M. Diaz-Cabrera, P. Cerri, and P. Medic, “Robust real-time trafﬁc light
detection and distance estimation using a single camera,” Expert Syst.
Appl., vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 3911–3923, 2015.
[16] K. Palaniappan et al., “Efﬁcient feature extraction and likelihood fusion
for vehicle tracking in low frame rate airborne video,” in Proc. 13th
Conf. Inf. Fusion (FUSION), Jul. 2010, pp. 1–8.
[17] O. Miksik, D. Munoz, J. A. Bagnell, and M. Hebert, “Efﬁcient temporal
consistency for streaming video scene analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom. (ICRA), May 2013, pp. 133–139.
[18] Y. Yang, J. Liu, and M. Shah, “Video scene understanding using multi-
scale analysis,” in Proc. IEEE 12th Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Sep. 2009,
pp. 1669–1676.
[19] J. M. Alvarez, T. Gevers, Y. LeCun, and A. M. Lopez, “Road scene
segmentation from a single image,” in Computer Vision—ECCV. Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2012, pp. 376–389.
[20] C. Kotsiourou and A. Amditis, “Dynamic road scene classiﬁcation:
Combining motion with a visual vocabulary model,” in Proc. 16th Int.
Conf. Inf. Fusion (FUSION), Jul. 2013, pp. 1151–1158.
[21] C. Fernández, R. Izquierdo, D. F. Llorca, and M. A. Sotelo, “A com-
parative analysis of decision trees based classiﬁers for road detection in
urban environments,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
Sep. 2015, pp. 719–724.
[22] T. Brox, M. Rousson, R. Deriche, and J. Weickert, “Unsupervised
segmentation incorporating colour, texture, and motion,” in Computer
Analysis of Images and Patterns. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2003,
pp. 353–360.
[23] T. Brox, M. Rousson, R. Deriche, and J. Weickert, “Colour, texture,
and motion in level set based segmentation and tracking,” Image Vis.
Comput., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 376–390, 2010.
[24] S. Watanabe, Pattern Recognition: Human and Mechanical. Hoboken,
NJ, USA: Wiley, 1985.
[25] F. Liu and R. W. Picard, “Periodicity, directionality, and randomness:
Wold features for image modeling and retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 722–733, Jul. 1996.
[26] L. Itti, C. Koch, and E. Niebur, “A model of saliency-based visual atten-
tion for rapid scene analysis,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 1254–1259, Nov. 1998.
[27] J. R. Raol, Multi-Sensor Data Fusion With MATLAB. Boca Raton, FL,
USA: CRC Press, 2009.
[28] H.
B.
Mitchell,
Multi-Sensor
Data
Fusion.
Berlin,
Germany:
Springer-Verlag, 2007.
[29] A. C. Muller and S. Narayanan, “Cognitively-engineered multisensor
image fusion for military applications,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 10, no. 2,
pp. 137–149, 2009.
[30] M. Altun and M. Celenk, “Image fusion based video content enhance-
ment for surveillance and tracking,” J. Graph., Vis. Image Process.,
vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 9–14, 2012.
[31] Z. Liu and R. Laganière, “Context enhancement through infrared vision:
A modiﬁed fusion scheme,” Signal, Image Video Process., vol. 1, no. 4,
pp. 293–301, 2007.
[32] M. Aguilar, D. A. Fay, W. D. Ross, A. M. Waxman, D. B. Ireland,
and J. P. Racamato, “Real-time fusion of low-light CCD and uncooled
IR imagery for color night vision,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 3364, no. 124,
pp. 124–135, 1998.
[33] A. Kano, K. Doi, H. MacMahon, D. Hassell, and M. Giger, “Digital
image subtraction of temporally sequential chest images for detec-
tion of interval change,” Med. Phys., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 453–461,
1994.
[34] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2006.
[35] M. Cheriet, J. N. Said, and C. Y. Suen, “A recursive thresholding
technique for image segmentation,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 7,
no. 6, pp. 918–921, Jun. 1998.
[36] N. Otsu, “A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms,”
IEEE
Trans.
Syst.,
Man,
Cybern.,
vol.
9,
no.
1,
pp.
62–66,
Jan. 1979.
[37] J.
S.
Lim,
Two-Dimensional
Signal
and
Image
Processing.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 1990.
[38] B. Lucas and T. Kanade, “An iterative image registration technique with
an application to stereo vision,” in Proc. 7th Int. Joint Conf. Artif. Intell.,
1981, pp. 674–679.
[39] B. K. P. Horn and B. G. Schunck, “Determining optical ﬂow,” Artif.
Intell., vol. 17, nos. 1–3, pp. 185–203, Aug. 1981.
[40] D. Sun, S. Roth, J. Lewis, and M. J. Black, “Learning optical ﬂow,” in
Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., vol. 3. 2008, pp. 83–97.
[41] Z. Wei, D.-J. Lee, B. E. Nelson, J. K. Archibald, and B. B. Edwards,
“FPGA-based embedded motion estimation sensor,” Int. J. Reconﬁger-
able Comput., vol. 2008, Jul. 2008, Art. no. 636145.
[42] D. Guo, S. Shamai, and S. Verdú, “Mutual information and minimum
mean-square error in Gaussian channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1261–1282, Apr. 2005.


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS
[43] G. J. Brostow, J. Fauqueur, and R. Cipolla, “Semantic object classes in
video: A high-deﬁnition ground truth database,” Pattern Recognit. Lett.,
vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 88–97, 2009.
Melih Altun (M’15) received the B.Sc. degree
in
electrical
engineering
from
Koc
University,
Istanbul, Turkey, in 2005; the M.Sc. degree in com-
puter science from Ege University, Izmir, Turkey,
in 2009; and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineer-
ing from Ohio University with a focus on image
processing and computer vision topics. From 2005 to
2008, he was with the Research and Development
Department, Vestel Electronics, and designed laptop
computer motherboards. He carried out research
assistantship duties and was a recipient of the
Stocker and NSF fellowships. Since 2014, he has been with Maxim Integrated,
San Jose, CA, as an Algorithm Developer. His research interests include image
processing, pattern recognition, and data fusion.
Mehmet Celenk (M’85) received the B.S. and M.S.
degrees in electrical and communications engineer-
ing from Istanbul Technical University in 1974 and
1976, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electri-
cal engineering and computer science (EECS) from
Stevens Institute of Technology in 1983. He was the
Robert Crook Stanley Graduate Fellow with Stevens
Institute of Technology in 1985. He served in the
Turkish Army from 1984 to 1985, as a Lieutenant.
He joined Ohio University (OU) in 1985, where he
is currently a Professor with the School of EECS.
He has authored 300 articles, received $600K hypercube processor grant,
participated in $450K Tubitak Autonomous Vehicle Design and Development
grant, and secured $120K fund for visiting scholars’ research and development
projects. His research area includes image/video processing, computer vision,
pattern recognition, multi-sensory networking and data-fusion, distributed
computing, multimedia, medical imaging, and digital systems. He is a member
of Eta Kappa Nu and a former member of SPIE, IS&T, ACM, ASEE, and OE.
He received the Certiﬁcate of Appreciation by SPIE’s Journal of Electronic
Imaging and Optical Engineering for his review services in 2012 and 2013. He
received the distinguished service award from the Signal School in Ankara for
his research and development work and launching Communications Journal.
He was a recipient of the 1988 Fritz & Dolores Russ Research Award of
the Russ College of ENT, OU, and received the OU Avionics Academic
Challenge Faculty Fellowship from 1988 to 1992. He was a recipient of
the Best Associate Award of the IEEE SMC Society in 2010. He chaired
35 M.S./Ph.D. theses/dissertations with the School of EECS, OU. He has been
an active Reviewer for numerous professional societies, such as the IEEE,
the IET, the SPIE, the IS&T, and the IAPR, journals/transactions, publishers,
and funding agencies, such as NSF, NYSTAR 2002-07, and NIS. He has
been an AE of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SMCA (currently SMC: Systems)
since 2005. He has been an Associate Editor of IET Electronic Letters and
an Associate Editor of EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing
since 2015. He has served on the Editorial Board of Journal of Recent Patents
on Signal Processing since 2008, Journal of Biometrics and its Applications
since 2014, and on TCM of numerous refereed conferences.


