This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS
1
Rolling Out the Red (and Green) Carpet:
Supporting Driver Decision Making in
Automation-to-Manual Transitions
Alexander Eriksson
, Sebastiaan M. Petermeijer, Markus Zimmermann,
Joost C. F. de Winter
, Klaus J. Bengler, and Neville A. Stanton
Abstract—This paper assessed four types of human–machine in-
terfaces (HMIs), classiﬁed according to the stages of automation
proposed by Parasuraman et al. [“A model for types and levels of
human interaction with automation,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, Cy-
bern. A, Syst. Humans, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 286–297, May 2000]. We
hypothesized that drivers would implement decisions (lane chang-
ing or braking) faster and more correctly when receiving support
at a higher automation stage during transitions from conditionally
automated driving to manual driving. In total, 25 participants with
a mean age of 25.7 years (range 19–36 years) drove four trials in
a driving simulator, experiencing four HMIs having the following
different stages of automation: baseline (information acquisition—
low), sphere (information acquisition—high), carpet (information
analysis), and arrow (decision selection), presented as visual over-
lays on the surroundings. The HMIs provided information during
two scenarios, namely a lane change and a braking scenario. Re-
sults showed that the HMIs did not signiﬁcantly affect the drivers’
initial reaction to the take-over request. Improvements were found,
however, in the decision-making process: When drivers experi-
enced the carpet or arrow interface, an improvement in correct
decisions (i.e., to brake or change lane) occurred. It is concluded
that visual HMIs can assist drivers in making a correct braking
or lane change maneuver in a take-over scenario. Future research
could be directed toward misuse, disuse, errors of omission, and
errors of commission.
Manuscript received February 14, 2017; revised September 12, 2017, January
8, 2018, May 7, 2018, and August 14, 2018; accepted October 20, 2018. This
work was supported by the European Marie Curie ITN Project HFAuto: Human
Factors of Automated Driving under Grant PITN-GA-2013-605817. This paper
was recommended by Associate Editor B. Donmez. (Corresponding author:
Alexander Eriksson.)
A. Eriksson is with the Institute for Transport Economics, Oslo 210349, Nor-
way and also with the Transportation Research Group, Faculty of Engineering
and the Environment, University of Southampton, Southampton SO16 7QF,
U.K. (e-mail:,aleer821@me.com).
S. M. Petermeijer, M. Zimmermann, and K. J. Bengler are with the De-
partment for Ergonomics, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Technical Uni-
versity Munich, Garching 85747, Germany (e-mail:,s.m.petermeijer@tum.de;
m.zimmermann@tum.de; bengler@tum.de).
J. C. F. de Winter is with the Department of Biomechanical Engineering,
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Delft 2628
CD, The Netherlands (e-mail:,j.c.f.dewinter@tudelft.nl).
N. A. Stanton is with the Transportation Research Group, Faculty of Engi-
neering and the Environment, University of Southampton, Southampton SO16
7QF, U.K. (e-mail:,n.stanton@soton.ac.uk).
This
paper
has
supplementary
downloadable
material
available
at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. The total size of the ﬁle is 10.8 MB.
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/THMS.2018.2883862
Index Terms—Augmented reality, automated driving, driver
support systems, human factors, human performance, transitions
of control.
I. INTRODUCTION
H
IGHLY automated driving will probably be introduced
onto public roads within a number of years. Vehicle man-
ufacturer Tesla was the ﬁrst to market what can be described
as a basic Autopilot [1], a partially automated highway driv-
ing system (SAE Level 2) and is approaching a higher level of
automation (conditionally automated, SAE Level 3) with their
Autopilot 2.0 hardware update [2]. Volvo will be launching their
ﬁrst trial with the IntelliSafe Autopilot system as part of their
Drive ME project [3], and Daimler is piloting Highway Pilot
technology among truck drivers [4].
Conditionally automated vehicles enable extended periods of
hands- and feet-free driving during which the driver is free to
engage in nondriving tasks, but with the legal constraint that
the driver has to be able to switch OFF or override the automa-
tion when required [5]. Such automated driving systems will
prompt the driver, using a so-called take-over request (TOR),
to resume control when the system’s limits (e.g., functional or
geographical) are reached.
A. Importance of HMIs in Take-Over Scenarios
In a review by De Winter et al. [6], it was found that drivers
who have been out of the control loop for an extended period
of time tend to suffer from degraded situation awareness. It
has been argued that drivers need to be aware of the functional
limits of the automation before these limits are reached [7]–
[10]. Eriksson and Stanton [9] and Stanton [11] proposed a
chatty codriver where the vehicle continually informs the driver
about its state and limitations.
Furthermore, conditionally automated vehicles need to allow
for a “sufﬁciently comfortable transition time” [12] of “several
seconds” after presenting a TOR [5]. In an attempt to gain an
understanding of how long drivers need to resume control from
an automated vehicle, Eriksson and Stanton [13] reviewed the
literature on control transitions and found that drivers take a
median of 2.5 s, and in some cases up to 15 s to resume con-
trol in urgent scenarios (e.g., [14]). Their review also showed
that when drivers are requested to resume control without time
pressure, they take between 2.1 and 3.5 s (median) longer
2168-2291 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
2
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS
than when under time pressure, depending on task engagement
[13]. Moreover, they argued that only considering the “average
driver” is insufﬁcient, as this excludes a large part of the driving
population due to the long tail of the reaction time distribution
(see also [15] and [16]).
In summary, a challenge of conditionally automated driving is
to get a driver back to the driving task in a safe manner. Human–
machine interfaces (HMIs) should be designed to support a safe
response of the driver during a take-over scenario [8], [9].
B. Existing HMIs that Support Take-Over Scenarios
According to Petermeijer et al. [19], Zeeb et al. [20], and
Kerschbaum et al. [21], resuming control from an automated
vehicle involves several mental and physical stages. The driver
resuming control must do the following.
1) Shift visual attention from the nondriving task back to the
road.
2) Scan the driving scene to cognitively process and evaluate
the trafﬁc situation and make an appropriate decision.
3) Move the hands and feet to the steering wheel and the
pedals so that control inputs can be made.
4) Implement the appropriate action via the steering wheel
and/or pedals.
A driver’s performance during a take-over scenario can also
be described at a control level and a tactical level, as per Michon
[22]. For example, retaking the steering wheel and stabilizing
the vehicle occur at the control level, whereas identifying ob-
stacles and making an evasive manoeuvre are behaviors at the
tactical/decision-making level.
Many previous studies on take-over scenarios have provided
simple auditory and visual warning signals to convey a TOR
to the driver (e.g., [20], [23], and [24]. For a review, see [13]
and [25]). Auditory and vibrotactile TORs have been shown to
elicit faster reaction times than visual ones [26]. These effects
may be due to the fact that auditory and vibrotactile feedback
compete less for perceptual resources than visual feedback [27]
as driving is primarily a visual task [28]. Moreover, it has been
found that presenting bimodal auditory/vibrotactile warnings
yielded a slight improvement in reaction time compared to their
unimodal constituents [29].
In addition to receiving a take-over warning, a driver could
also be supported in making decisions. Research has indicated
that drivers, after receiving a vibrotactile warning, ﬁrst visu-
ally assess the outside environment [30], [31]. The vibrotactile
modality is not particularly effective in conveying complex in-
formation [32], [33]. Visual and vocal messages, on the contrary,
can convey complex information that is linked to the surround-
ing scene [33]–[35]. Thus, auditory [36] and vibrotactile signals
are recommended as warnings (i.e., they are expected to attract
attention and support a fast initial response), whereas visual and
vocal displays are recommended for conveying semantics to the
driver (i.e., they are expected to support cognitive processing
and tactical decision making).
C. Automation framework to Support Decision Making
A framework proposed by Parasuraman et al. [37] stated that
automation can be divided into the following four stages: infor-
Fig. 1.
Representation on the four stages of information support, namely
acquisition – low (red solid), acquisition – high (blue dotted), analysis (orange
long dashes), and selection (green short dashes). Adapted from Parasuraman
et al. [37].
mation acquisition; information analysis; decision selection; and
action implementation (in short, acquisition, analysis, selection,
and implementation). According to Parasuraman et al. [37], an
automated system may involve different levels of automation at
each stage. Note that Parasuraman et al. [37] based their model
on existing models of human information processing, which
explains the similarities between the stages of their framework
and the information processing stages in the take-over process
described above.
When a conditionally automated vehicle (SAE Level 3)
reaches its functional limits and presents a TOR to the driver,
this inherently means that the automated system cannot safely
implement actions anymore and requires driver intervention.
Despite no longer being able to implement actions, the system
could potentially still assist the driver in making decisions by
means of an HMI displaying information available from the re-
maining three automation stages (i.e., information acquisition,
information analysis, and decision selection).
A TOR consisting of a notiﬁcation in the instrument clus-
ter combined with an auditory signal, as in the work of Gold
et al. [23], would be considered a low level of acquisition support
(see Fig. 1, acquisition—low), because the HMI only informs the
driver that she/he needs to take over (starting with scanning the
environment). A higher level of acquisition (acquisition—high)
would draw the attention toward important elements in the sur-
roundings. An interface that also provides information about the
surrounding trafﬁc situation (e.g., adjacent lane is free/occupied)
[38] and suggests actions (e.g., change lane/brake) [39] would
score highly on information analysis and decision selection,
respectively.
D. Possible Advantages and Disadvantages of Feedback and
Support Systems
The beneﬁts of feedback and support systems have been
widely reported in the literature. For example, forward colli-
sion warning systems are known to decrease brake reaction
times [40]–[42], and a vibrotactile gas pedal was found to im-
prove eco-driving performance [43]. A simulator study by Israel
[44] showed that visual head-up displays decreased the num-
ber of navigational mistakes at intersections. Moreover, it has


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ERIKSSON et al.: ROLLING OUT THE RED (AND GREEN) CARPET: SUPPORTING DRIVER DECISION MAKING
3
previously been shown that visual augmented feedback can be
used to improve drivers’ situation awareness [27], [45].
Detrimental effects of support systems have also been re-
ported (primarily in aviation), such as complacency [46] and
skill degradation [47], [48]. Another issue that arises with in-
creasing support is automation bias, in the form of errors of
omission or commission. An error of omission occurs when an
operator fails to implement an appropriate action because the
operator was not informed by the support system [38], [49].
An error of commission occurs when an operator implements
an incorrect action suggested by the support system, without
considering other indicators [50]. In a review of the litera-
ture, Mosier and Skitka [51] noted that automation bias occurs
not only for untrained operators but also for experienced ones,
suggesting that automation bias is a persistent problem. These
forms of automation bias could lead to dangerous situations
(e.g., [52]), for example when the system falsely instructs the
driver to change lane whilst the target lane is occupied by other
vehicles.
E. Aim of This Experiment
The aim of this experiment was to investigate driver behavior
in take-over scenarios with different stages of support.
Eriksson and Stanton [53] previously used the so-called COn-
textual COntrol model (COCOM) [54] to explain driver perfor-
mance in a take-over scenario. This model states that successful
tactical decision can be invoked by giving operators more time
or by enhancing the predictability of the situation. The authors
used this to compare driver-paced transitions [53] (which allow
for extra planning time) with transitions under time pressure
(cf., [23] and [55]–[58]). In accordance with the predictions of
the COCOM, we expected that improvements would occur in
driver decision making by increasing the predictability of the
situation through HMIs that involve different stages of automa-
tion. We expected that the HMIs assessed in this paper would
not help reduce the initial reaction times (e.g., grabbing the
steering wheel) after the TOR. The immediate control activity
is “automatic” and requires little conscious effort to be executed
(cf., [59] and [60]).
This study assessed how driver’s performance was affected
as a function of visual support within the following automation
stages: information acquisition; information analysis; and deci-
sion selection. It was expected that drivers would implement de-
cisions more correctly and faster when receiving a higher stage
of support, as shown in Fig. 1. Moreover, by measuring head
movements, we aimed to obtain insight into whether drivers
are prone to automation bias and follow the HMI’s suggestion
without verifying the safety of the suggested action [46].
II. METHOD
A. Participants
A total of 25 participants (14 male and 11 female) with a mean
age of 25.7 years (SD = 3.9, min = 19, max = 36, and N = 24
because one participant did not report his age) and an average
driving experience of 8.3 years (SD = 4.1) took part in the study.
Fig. 2.
Two take-over scenarios. Top: the group of cars is too close to change
lane safely and the driver is expected to brake (i.e., braking scenario). Bottom:
the group of cars is far enough away for the driver to overtake the vehicle safely
(i.e., lane change scenario).
Two participants indicated to drive daily, 3 participants reported
4–6 days a week, 10 reported 1–3 days a week, 5 reported once
a month, 4 reported less than once a month, and 1 reported they
never drove in the past 12 months. The study received ethical
approval from the Southampton University Ethics Committee
(RGO number: 19930), and all participants provided written
informed consent.
B. Apparatus
A static simulator, ﬁxed-base, BMW 6-series mockup, oper-
ated the SILAB (version 4) software. The simulator offered a
180° front view and rear projections for every mirror (left, inner,
and right), generated by six projectors. Road and engine noise
was played back, and low-frequency vibrations were provided
via a bass shaker in the driver seat. The automation could be tog-
gled by pressing a button (with a diamond-shaped icon) on the
steering wheel. The automation adhered to the lane centre by ap-
plying light torques on the steering wheel. The driver could still
steer when the automation was active, and accordingly inﬂuence
the lateral position of the vehicle. The automation disengaged
when the lateral speed of the car exceeded about 1 m/s, or when
the brake pedal depression exceeded 25%. An icon located be-
tween the speedometer and tachometer indicated the automation
status (i.e., unavailable, active, or inactive).
The participants played “Angry Birds” as a nondriving task
during the intervals of automated driving. Angry Birds was
deemed suitable because it is an interruptible [61] task that does
not penalize the player for switching to another task. The driver
played the game on a Lenovo A7-50 7-inch tablet that was
mounted in the centre console, in front of the radio.
The participants’ head and gaze motion were tracked using
a three-camera remote system (Smart Eye Pro 6.1). Simulation
and eye tracking data were synchronized and logged at 60 Hz.
The vehicle environment was modeled in the Smart Eye software
to relate eye gaze and real-world objects. The windshield was
deﬁned as an area of interest.
C. Take-Over Scenarios
The automated vehicle drove in the right lane on a two-
lane highway at 110 km/h (68.4 mi/h) and approached a slow-
moving vehicle (e.g., truck, tractor, or moped) driving at 58
km/h (36.0 mi/h) (see Fig. 2). When the time to collision
(TTC) with the slow-moving vehicle decreased below 12 s, the


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
4
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS
Fig. 3.
Illustration of the vibrotactile seat and the location of the 48 vibration
motors (i.e., white circles). The motors are arranged in two matrices of 6 × 4
motors (one matrix in the seat back, and the other matrix in the seat bottom).
automation issued a TOR. Simultaneously, a group of other ve-
hicles, driving at 150 km/h (93.2 mi/h), approached in the left
lane. The group of vehicles was, at the moment of the TOR,
either approximately 165 m behind (i.e., the ﬁrst vehicle would
pass in approximately 1 s) so that the driver could safely change
lane (i.e., lane change scenario), or approximately 50 m behind
(i.e., the ﬁrst vehicle would pass in approximately 4.5 s) so that
the driver was required to reduce the speed of his or her ve-
hicle (i.e., braking scenario). In summary, drivers could safely
change lane in the lane change scenario, whereas they could not
safely change lanes in the braking scenario until the platoon had
passed.
D. HMIs for TORs
To increase the likelihood that drivers respond successfully
to a TOR, a bimodal feedback paradigm was used. The HMIs
in this experiment consisted of vibrotactile stimuli in the seat,
provided by vibration motors (see Fig. 3). Simultaneously, an
augmented reality display (based on [39], [62], and [63]) showed
warnings, information, or decision suggestions for courses of
action (see Fig. 4). Depending on whether the drivers faced a
braking or a lane change scenario, the information analysis and
decision selection visuals were redundantly encoded by means
of color (red and green; i.e., having a well-established meaning,
see also [45]), shape (wide or narrow carpet), and direction (left
or backward arrows).
More speciﬁcally, this study tested the following four types of
information support conditions during six take-over scenarios
per condition (three lane change conditions and three braking
conditions) with various stages of support (see Fig. 1).
1) Information Acquisition—Low: A vibrotactile warning
indicating that the driver had to resume control. The vi-
bration seat (see Fig. 3) presented a series of three 320 ms
pulses (70 ms engaged and 250 ms disengaged) in all 48
motors in the seat to inform the driver that he/she needed
to resume control. No extra visuals were presented in this
condition. Hence, the driver did not receive any additional
information from the interface other than the vibrotactile
Fig. 4.
Visual interface for the four levels of support. (a) Baseline condition:
No visual support in both scenarios. (b) Sphere condition: A blue sphere high-
lighting the slow-moving vehicle ahead in both scenarios. (c) Carpet condition:
A green carpet in the left lane for the lane change scenario. (d) Carpet condition:
A red barrier covering the lane markings for the braking scenario. (e) Arrow
condition: A green arrow pointing left for the lane change scenario. (f) Arrow
condition: A red arrow pointing backward for the braking scenario.
TOR [see Fig. 4(a)]. This vibration was the baseline con-
dition.
2) Information Acquisition—High: At the same moment as
the TOR (i.e., the vibrotactile warning), an augmented
sphere highlighted the slowly moving vehicle ahead (see
Fig. 4(b); similar to [39] and [64]). Thus, in addition to
the TOR, the driver received a visual cue to direct his/her
attention toward the cause of the TOR (the leading vehi-
cle). The vibrations together with the sphere overlay are
referred to as the sphere condition.
3) Information Analysis: In addition to the vibrotactile warn-
ing, an augmented-reality overlay informed whether there
was a gap in the left lane. In the lane change scenario, a
wide green carpet in the left lane informed drivers about
available space in the other lane [like in [39]; see Fig. 4(c)],
whereas in the braking scenario, a narrow red barrier be-
tween the lanes emphasized a no-passing zone [inspired
by the H-mode visuals [63]; see Fig. 4(d)]. The vibro-
tactile warning and visual information formed the carpet
condition.


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ERIKSSON et al.: ROLLING OUT THE RED (AND GREEN) CARPET: SUPPORTING DRIVER DECISION MAKING
5
4) Decision Selection: At the same moment as the vibrotac-
tile warning, augmented reality arrows at a ﬁxed distance
from the driver indicated that the driver could change lane
or brake (see Fig. 4(e) and (f); see also [39]). The vibro-
tactile warning with the arrow is referred to as the arrow
condition.
In all scenarios, the HMI was hidden when the host vehicle
crossed into the adjacent lane. Additionally, the green carpet
and green arrow disappeared when the approaching vehicles
on the left lane were too close (TTC = 2 s). In the braking
scenario, the HMI disappeared when the platoon had passed.
Additionally, the red arrow disappeared when TTC to the lead
vehicle became larger than 12 s, as this was an indication that
the participant had already braked sufﬁciently.
E. Experimental Design and Instructions to Participants
A within-subject design was used for the different HMI con-
ditions. The participants drove a 1.5-min practice run during
which they could familiarize themselves with the automation
and the take over, after which the following four trials were
driven in counterbalanced order, each trial with a different HMI:
information acquisition—low; information acquisition—high;
information analysis; and (4) decision selection.
Participants were provided with an instruction form, which
stated that they would be driving an automated car that con-
trols speed and stays in the lane. The form also explained the
automation-status icons on the dashboard, and instructed partic-
ipants to have their hands off the steering wheel and their feet
off the pedals while the automation is active. Participants were
instructed to play Angry Birds on the tablet in the car and were
informed that they did not have to look at the road. Participants
were also informed that they will be approaching a slow-moving
vehicle ahead, at which moment the automation will ask them
to take back control of the car, via vibrations in the seat and one
of four assistance systems. The form included a picture and text
explaining each HMI. Finally, participants were informed that
the automation will function perfectly and does not need any
monitoring, except when it provides a TOR. Participants were
not informed about the behavior of the approaching platoon in
the left lane.
During each trial, the participant experienced six take-over
procedures of which three took place in the braking scenario
and three in the lane change scenario. Speciﬁcally, the lane
change (LC) and brake (B) scenarios were presented in the
following order: B, LC, B, LC, B, LC for the baseline and arrow
trials, LC, B, LC, B, LC, B for the carpet trial, and LC, B, B,
LC, LC, B for the sphere trial. Each trial lasted approximately
12 min, with a request to resume control in a braking or lane
change scenario occurring about every 110 s. After each trial,
participants stepped out of the vehicle to have a break and to
complete two questionnaires.
F. Dependent Measures
The experiment employed several objective measures to cap-
ture performance and reaction times, which are as follows.
1) Success Rate: In the lane change scenario, a manoeuvre
was considered successful if the driver changed lanes be-
fore the cars in the adjacent lane passed (thus, avoiding
unnecessary, harsh braking). In the braking scenario, a
manoeuvre was regarded as successful when the partici-
pant made a lane change after all cars in the adjacent lane
had passed (thus, avoiding aggressive merging into the
other lane and maintaining the speed limit on the road).
The deﬁnition of a lane change was that the host vehicle’s
centre of gravity had crossed the lane boundary.
2) Braking Rate: The percentage of scenarios in which the
participants used the brake pedal. Application of the
brakes in the lane change scenario is an indication of
unnecessary deceleration.
3) Eyes-on-Windshield Reaction Time: The time between
the onset of the TOR to the moment the eye gaze of the
driver was ﬁrst detected in the windshield area.
4) Hand-on-Wheel Reaction Time: The time between the
onset of the TOR to the moment the drivers put a hand
back on the steering wheel, measured with induction coils
in the steering wheel.
5) Steer Move Time: The time between the onset of the TOR
and the ﬁrst detectible steering input (i.e., above sensor
noise threshold). The steer move time is equivalent to
the hand-on-wheel reaction time but was measured from
the steering wheel angle instead of induction coils in the
steering wheel.
6) Brake Reaction Time: The time between the onset of TOR
to the onset of a depression of the brake pedal [23].
7) Lane Change Time: The lane change time is the time from
the onset of the TOR to the moment that the host vehicle’s
centre of gravity had crossed the lane boundary.
8) Head Angle: The mean and standard deviation of the angle
of the head as a function of travelled distance was used to
represent the direction of the participant’s visual attention.
The head angle was deﬁned as the nose angle (a vector
originating at the middle of the head and pointing out of
the nose) in world coordinates (perpendicular to the front
screen with its origin approximately at the vanishing point
of the road). Thus, the head angle is zero when the driver’s
head is pointing straight to the road. Note that we used
head movements instead of eye movements, because eye
movement data was deemed less robust according to our
data quality assessment. Considering that head orientation
is a proxy for glance direction [65], head orientation was
deemed suitable for our purpose of assessing whether the
participants looked at the road or to at secondary task
display.
The following two questionnaires were utilized as subjective
measures for workload and acceptance.
1) The NASA raw TLX was used to evaluate the perceived
workload per condition [66], [67]. The questionnaire con-
sists of six items: mental demand, physical demand, tem-
poral demand, performance, effort, and frustration. The
items had a 21-tick Likert scale, ranging from “very low”
to “very high,” except the performance item, which ranged
from “perfect” to “failure.”


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
6
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS
Fig. 5.
Mean head angle across participants (N = 25) as a function of travelled distance for braking (left) and lane change (right) scenarios. The shaded area
around the (black) mean indicates the standard deviation across the means of the participants in all conditions. The vertical dashed line indicates the moment of
the TOR.
2) A nine-item technology acceptance questionnaire [68]
was used to measure the usefulness and satisfaction
of the different support types. The usefulness score
was calculated from the following ﬁve items on a
semantic-differential ﬁve-point scale from −2 to +2:
1. useful–useless, 3. bad–good, 5. effective–superﬂuous,
7. assisting–worthless, and 9. raising alertness–sleep-
inducing. The satisfaction score was calculated from the
following four items: 2. pleasant–unpleasant, 4. nice–
annoying, 6. irritating–likeable, 8. undesirable–desirable.
Sign reversals were conducted for items 1, 2, 4, 5, 7,
and 9, so that a higher score indicates higher useful-
ness/satisfaction.
G. Statistical Analyses
Due to the expected nonnormal distribution of the response
time data (these types of data are known to have a high-kurtosis
distribution) [13], [18], nonparametric Friedman tests with
Wilcoxon signed-rank tests (with the alpha level corrected
for multiple comparisons) were used. Effect sizes of the
Friedman’s test were represented by Kendall’s W, deﬁned as
W = χ2/N(k−1), where χ2 is the test statistic, N is the number
of participants (25), and k is the number of conditions per
participant (4).
For the Wilcoxon signed-rank tests, effect sizes were calcu-
lated as r = |Z/N0.5|, where Z is the Z-statistic, and N is the
number of participants.
For the comparison of the head movements between HMIs,
Wilcoxon signed-rank tests of the head eccentricity were per-
formed for every time sample (see Fig. 6). The level of signif-
icance was visualized as the negative base-10 logarithm of the
p-value, where large values represent small p-values in a simi-
lar fashion to the ‘Manhattan’ plot [53], [69]–[71]. Our use of
multiple Wilcoxon signed-rank tests allows for a high temporal
resolution (as opposed to using larger bin sizes and fewer tests).
It must be noted that despite relatively conservative corrections
of the signiﬁcance level, the results should only be seen as in-
dicative. The interpretability of the analysis has been increased
through the addition of the effect size measure r. Additionally,
two animated clips of the head movements represented as a
heatmap over time, for the same section of road as shown in
Fig. 5, have been made (see supplementary materials).
All statistical tests were performed at the level of the partici-
pant. Average values of the dependent measures per participant
were calculated across the three braking or three lane-change
scenarios within a trial. For an alpha of 0.05, a sample size of 25,
and a medium-to-strong effect size (dz = 0.60), the achieved
statistical power for a two-tailed test is 80%.
III. RESULTS
From the 600 scenarios (25 participants ×4 trials × 6 scenar-
ios per trial), 13 scenarios were excluded due to improper data
recording or a participant already touching the steering wheel at
the moment of the TOR. In 81.3% of the braking scenarios, the
participants made a lane change after the cars in the adjacent
lane had passed, whereas in 95.7% of the lane change scenarios
the participants performed a lane change ahead of the cars (see
Table I). In events that were counted as unsuccessful (e.g., brak-
ing from 120 to 58 km/h, while a lane change is possible, cannot
be considered a “successful” action while driving on a highway.
Furthermore, it is debatable whether such braking is safe. We
argue that it is not safe, because such a major deceleration may


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ERIKSSON et al.: ROLLING OUT THE RED (AND GREEN) CARPET: SUPPORTING DRIVER DECISION MAKING
7
Fig. 6.
Top: Mean and standard deviation (shaded area) of head angle across participants (N = 25) as a function of travelled distance for the baseline and arrow
conditions. The vertical dashed line indicates the moment of the TOR. Bottom: p-values from Wilcoxon signed-rank tests for the head angle between the baseline
and arrow conditions. The horizontal dashed line indicates a threshold of p = 0.01.
TABLE I
SUCCESS RATE AND BRAKING RATE FOR STEERING AND BRAKING SCENARIOS
AS A FUNCTION OF THE SUPPORT CONDITION
cause a third vehicle to collide in the back), the participants
either hazardously changed lanes (causing the platoon to brake)
or waited until all vehicles had passed before changing lanes
(braking and lane change scenario, respectively).
Participants in the braking scenario changed lanes erro-
neously more often (i.e., a lower success rate) in the baseline and
sphere conditions than in the carpet and arrow conditions (see
Table I). In the lane change scenario, the sphere yielded fewer
successful lane changes and more unneeded braking actions
compared to baseline, carpet, and arrow. Furthermore, a learn-
ing effect was observed, where participants braked less often
as they experienced additional lane change events (supplemen-
tary material); this observation is consistent with ﬁndings from
Petermeijer et al. [29]. Descriptive statistics for the objective
measures are given in Table II. There were no signiﬁcant effects
for the HMIs on the steer move times in both the braking sce-
nario, χ2(3, N = 25) = 1.42, p = 0.702, and W = 0.02, and
the lane change scenario, χ2(3, N = 25) = 5.30, p = 0.151,
and W = 0.07. In the braking scenario, there were signiﬁcant
TABLE II
MEDIANS AND INTERQUARTILE RANGES (IQR) FOR THE DEPENDENT
MEASURES ACROSS PARTICIPANTS
Note. Brake reaction times are not reported in the lane change scenario because partic-
ipants often did not brake (see Table I).
differences in brake reaction time (χ2(3, N = 21)
= 14.2,
p = 0.003, and W = 0.23). The arrow, in particular, evoked
a rapid and strong braking input in the braking scenario (see
supplementary materials).
A signiﬁcant effect of the HMIs was also found for the lane
change time in the braking scenario, χ2 (3, N = 25) = 8.47, p =
0.037, and W = 0.11. Post-hoc analysis showed a signiﬁcantly


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
8
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS
TABLE III
PAIRED COMPARISONS BETWEEN THE FOUR HMIS REGARDING THE LANE CHANGE TIME AFTER THE TOR
∗indicates a signiﬁcant difference at the Bonferroni-corrected alpha level (0.0083).
slower lane change time for the carpet as compared to the arrow
(see Table III), which may be due to the red barrier which
remained present until the trafﬁc stream had passed.
A signiﬁcant main effect of the HMIs was also found for the
time it took to change lane in the lane change scenario, χ2(3, N
= 25) = 15.84, p = 0.001, and W = 0.21. Wilcoxon signed-
rank post-hoc tests showed a signiﬁcantly faster execution of the
lane change for the arrow compared to the sphere and baseline,
and for the carpet compared to baseline (see Table III).
A. Head Movements
Fig. 5 shows the mean head angle (with respect to looking
to the road straight ahead) across participants in the four driv-
ing conditions, for the lane change and braking scenarios. The
shaded area represents the standard deviation across the means
of participants. Before the TOR, participants exhibited a large
head angle, because they were performing the secondary task
located at their bottom right. After the TOR was issued, partic-
ipants shifted their attention back to the road.
Fig. 6 is a detailed version of Fig. 5, which compares the
baseline with the arrow condition. The bottom graphs show the
results of Wilcoxon signed-rank tests between these two con-
ditions. It is worth noting that the values in the bottom graphs
are negative base-10 logarithms of p, meaning that high values
represent low p-values. The horizontal dashed lines show the
threshold for signiﬁcant differences (p < 0.01). Signiﬁcantly
larger head angles were found for the baseline condition com-
pared to the arrow condition, in the braking scenario around 70
m post TOR. This effect may be due to the arrow reducing the
need to check the status of the left lane. Another explanation is
that participants were focusing on the arrow, which appeared in
the centre of the lane (see Fig. 4).
B. Satisfaction and Usefulness Scale
The results of a Friedman test showed signiﬁcant differences
in perceived usefulness of the different HMIs, χ2(3, N = 25) =
22.72, p < 0.001, and W = 0.30.
As shown in Fig. 7, the sphere condition yielded the lowest
scores of the four HMIs. Post-hoc Wilcoxon signed-rank tests
Fig. 7.
Mean usefulness and satisfaction score per condition. The grey error
bars indicate the mean ± 1 standard deviation across participants. Mean (SD)
usefulness: 0.66 (0.87), 0.33 (0.94), 1.08 (0.80), and 1.16 (0.74), for baseline,
sphere, carpet and arrow, respectively. Mean (SD) satisfaction: 0.67 (0.91),
0.13 (0.97), 0.89 (0.83), 0.81 (0.94), for the baseline, sphere, carpet, and arrow
conditions, respectively.
showed that the arrow and carpet yielded a signiﬁcantly higher
usefulness than the baseline and sphere (see Table IV).
A Friedman test of perceived satisfaction also showed signif-
icant differences between the HMI, χ2(3, N = 25) = 12.30,
p = 0.006, and W = 0.16. Post-hoc Wilcoxon signed-rank tests
showed signiﬁcantly higher satisfaction for the carpet compared
to the sphere condition (see Table IV).
C. Overall Workload
The results of a Friedman’s ANOVA showed signiﬁcant dif-
ferences in self-reported overall workload as measured by the
NASA-TLX levels χ2(3, N = 25) = 10.74, p = 0.013, and


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ERIKSSON et al.: ROLLING OUT THE RED (AND GREEN) CARPET: SUPPORTING DRIVER DECISION MAKING
9
TABLE IV
PAIRED COMPARISONS BETWEEN THE PERCEIVED USEFULNESS AND SATISFACTION OF THE FOUR HMIS
∗indicates a signiﬁcant difference at the Bonferroni-corrected alpha level (0.0083).
TABLE V
MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF THE SELF-REPORTED WORKLOAD PER
HMI CONDITION. RESULTS ARE SHOWN ON A SCALE FROM 0 (VERY
LOW/PERFECT) TO 100 (VERY HIGH/FAILURE)
W = 0.14 (see Table V). No signiﬁcant difference was observed
when carrying out a Bonferroni-corrected Wilcoxon signed-rank
post-hoc analysis between pairs of conditions.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. Success Rate and Braking Rate
The results showed that drivers had an overall success rate of
81.3% in the braking scenario and 95.7% in the lane change sce-
nario. The success rates for the carpet and arrow conditions were
higher than for the baseline and sphere conditions, indicating
that drivers were better assisted when they received higher stages
of support. Similar effects with respect to a baseline condition
without visual support have been shown by Lorenz et al. [45],
who used a green and red augmented reality carpet that indicated
a safe versus a restricted way of travel, and by Zimmermann
et al. [39], who reported higher success rates when employing
a combination of a carpet and an arrow. The high success rates
of the carpet and arrow may be due to the use of salient green
and red colors, which are well-established indicators of safety
and danger/urgency, respectively, [72], [73]. One difference be-
tween the carpet and the arrow in the braking scenario was that
the arrow yielded stronger and more immediate braking than
the carpet (i.e., red barrier) (see also supplementary materials).
This can be explained by the fact that the arrow represents a
directive to brake (i.e., decision-selection automation).
In the lane change scenario, there was a lower braking rate
for the arrow and carpet conditions as compared to the base-
line and sphere conditions, indicating that drivers receiving a
higher stage of support (cf., Fig. 1) made more successful lane
changes. The relatively high braking percentages in the base-
line and sphere conditions in the lane change scenario may be
because participants were uncertain about which action to un-
dertake, or because they intended to increase their time budget
for making a decision.
Contrary to our expectations, the sphere yielded a lower suc-
cess rate than the baseline condition in the lane change scenario
(see Table I). An explanation could be that the meaning of the
sphere was unclear or that the sphere was interpreted as a dan-
ger, thereby triggering an unneeded braking reaction. Another
explanation is that the sphere masked some of the intrinsic vi-
sual cues, such as optical looming [74], which drivers normally
use in braking. While this is a possibility, some of the loom-
ing information was still provided by the sphere overlay, as the
sphere scaled with the distance to the lead vehicle.
B. Reaction Times
The reaction times of the eyes on the windshield and the steer-
ing wheel were not signiﬁcantly affected by the visual informa-
tion presented to the driver. This is expected, as these measures
reﬂect a shift of attention, which is unrelated to the type of vi-
sual support. Lorenz et al. [45] and Langlois and Soualmi [64]
also found no signiﬁcant differences in initial reaction times
between visual interfaces (i.e., augmented red or green carpets)
and a control condition.
C. Head Movements
The head movements for the four HMIs were relatively sim-
ilar (see Fig. 5). However, there were subtle but signiﬁcant
differences after the TOR: the carpet and arrow attracted visual


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
10
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS
attention, whereas participants in the baseline condition were
less likely to look straight ahead (see Figs. 5 and 6).
The increase in forward attention could be a manifestation
of attentional tunnelling [75], as participants focus on the aug-
mented feedback, while paying less attention to the rest of the
scene (e.g., checking the mirrors to see whether the left lane is
free).
According to theories in linguistics [7], [76], [77], effective
communication is achieved when messages are relevant and not
more informative than required. Extrapolating this idea to HMI
design, we may recommend that HMIs should not present too
much information (e.g., visual clutter and multiple symbols),
as this may cause participants to focus on the HMI itself rather
than the surrounding environment.
D. Subjective Data
In terms of perceived usefulness and satisfaction of the HMIs,
there was no statistically signiﬁcant difference between the car-
pet and arrow conditions, but drivers found both the carpet and
the arrow more useful than the sphere. Previous research by
Werneke and Vollrath [78] found that augmented feedback in
the form of a bird’s eye view received more positive ratings
from drivers than a late warning in the form of a sphere that
highlighted a dangerous vehicle. Schwarz and Fastenmeier [79]
found that augmented reality warnings (i.e., scenario-speciﬁc
icons accompanied by arrows coming from the direction of dan-
ger) were rated more highly than unspeciﬁc visual or auditory
warnings.
The relatively poor driving performance in the sphere condi-
tion may indicate that the information it conveyed was insuf-
ﬁcient for making a proper decision. It is possible that drivers
needed time to interpret the sphere, leading to lower satisfaction
and usefulness scores.
V. CONCLUSION
This study assessed four types of HMIs, classiﬁed along the
stages of automation suggested by Parasuraman et al. [37]. We
hypothesized that drivers would beneﬁt from visual feedback on
the information acquisition, information analysis, and decision
selection stages during transitions to manual control following
conditionally automated driving.
The HMIs in this paper did not beneﬁt initial reaction times.
Improvements appeared, however, in decision making, where
participants had to assess whether to brake or to change lane af-
ter the request to resume control. The carpet (information analy-
sis) and arrow (decision selection) conditions outperformed the
sphere and baseline conditions in terms of manoeuver success
rates. Merely highlighting an obstacle via a sphere (information
acquisition—high) did not improve decision making, but rather
increased unnecessary braking.
In our study, the HMIs always provided reliable informa-
tion, yet some participants still made unsafe lane changes in the
braking scenario (see Table I). Future research could investigate
more authoritative HMIs (e.g., by adding speech feedback) to
increase driver compliance. Future research could also inves-
tigate driver behavior when the HMI does not appear when it
should (potentially resulting in an error of omission) and when
the HMI provides incorrect advice (potentially resulting in an
error of commission). In our study, braking and lane changes
scenarios were presented in an alternating fashion. Furthermore,
future research should be carried out in a larger variety of ran-
domized trafﬁc situations. Finally, the participants experienced
the HMIs for a rather short time (approximately 12 min), but
showed learning in the form of a reduction of unneeded braking
as a function of scenario number. A longitudinal study on actual
roads should be performed to study whether participants develop
complacency/misuse (e.g., whether the HMI causes drivers to
fail to check the blind spot and change lanes when braking would
be safer) and disuse (e.g., whether drivers disengage the HMI).
REFERENCES
[1] Tesla Motors, “Model S software version 7.0,” 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://www.teslamotors.com/presskit/autopilot
[2] Tesla Motors, “Autopilot,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.tesla.
com/en_GB/autopilot
[3] VolvoCars, “Intellisafe autopilot.” [Online]. Available: http://www.
volvocars.com/au/about/innovations/intellisafe/autopilot
[4] Daimler, “The auto pilot for trucks: Highway pilot,” 2016. [Online]. Avail-
able:
https://www.daimler.com/innovation/autonomous-driving/special/
technology-trucks.html
[5] Taxonomy and Deﬁnitions for Terms Related to Driving Automation Sys-
tems for On-Road Motor Vehicles,” J3016_201609, SAE International,
Warrendale, PA, USA, 2016.
[6] J. C. De Winter, R. Happee, M. H. Martens, and N. A. Stanton, “Effects
of adaptive cruise control and highly automated driving on workload and
situation awareness: A review of the empirical evidence,” Transp. Res.
Part F, Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav., vol. 27, pp. 196–217, 2014.
[7] L. F. Cranor, “A framework for reasoning about the human in the loop,”
in Proc. 1st Conf. Usability, Psychol., Secur., San Francisco, CA, USA,
2008, pp. 1–15.
[8] A. Eriksson and N. A. Stanton, “The chatty co-driver: A linguistics ap-
proach applying lessons learnt from aviation incidents,” Saf. Sci., vol. 99,
pp. 94–101, 2017.
[9] A. Eriksson and N. A. Stanton, “When communication breaks down or
what was that? – The importance of communication for successful co-
ordination in complex systems,” Proc. Manuf., vol. 3, pp. 2418–2425,
2015.
[10] B. D. Seppelt and J. D. Lee, “Making adaptive cruise control (ACC) limits
visible,” Int. J. Human Comput. Stud., vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 192–205, 2007.
[11] C. Poulin, N. A. Stanton, D. Cebon, and W. Epple, “Responses to au-
tonomous vehicles,” Ingenia, no. 62, pp. 8–11, 2015.
[12] National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration, “Preliminary statement
of policy concerning automated vehicles,” 2013.
[13] A. Eriksson and N. A. Stanton, “Take-over time in highly automated
vehicles: Non-critical transitions to and from manual control,” Human
Factors, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 689–705, 2017.
[14] M. K¨orber, C. Gold, D. Lechner, and K. Bengler, “The inﬂuence of age
on the take-over of vehicle control in highly automated driving,” Transp.
Res. Part F, Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav., vol. 9, pp. 19–32, 2016.
[15] N. Merat, A. H. Jamson, F. F. C. H. Lai, M. Daly, and O. M. J. Carsten,
“Transition to manual: Driver behaviour when resuming control from a
highly automated vehicle,” Transp. Res. Part F, Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav.,
vol. 26, pp. 1–9, 2014.
[16] W. Payre, J. Cestac, and P. Delhomme, “Fully automated driving: Impact
of trust and practice on manual control recovery,” Human Factors, J.
Human Factors Ergonom. Soc., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 229–241, 2016.
[17] C. D. Wickens, “Attention to safety and the psychology of surprise,” in
Proc. Symp. Aviation Psychol., Columbus, OH, USA, 2001.
[18] A. Eriksson, V. A. Banks, and N. A. Stanton, “Transition to manual:
Comparing simulator with on-road control transitions,” Accident Anal.
Prevention, vol. 102C, pp. 227–234, 2017.
[19] S. M. Petermeijer, D. A. Abbink, M. Mulder, and J. C. De Winter, “The ef-
fect of haptic support systems on driver performance: A literature survey,”
IEEE Trans. Haptics, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 467–479, Oct.–Dec. 2015.
[20] K. Zeeb, A. Buchner, and M. Schrauf, “What determines the take-over
time? An integrated model approach of driver take-over after automated
driving,” Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 78, pp. 212–221, 2015.


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
ERIKSSON et al.: ROLLING OUT THE RED (AND GREEN) CARPET: SUPPORTING DRIVER DECISION MAKING
11
[21] P. Kerschbaum, L. Lorenz, and K. Bengler, “A transforming steering
wheel for highly automated cars,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp., 2015,
pp. 1287–1292.
[22] J. A. Michon, “A critical view of driver behavior models: What do we
know, what should we do?” in Human Behavior and Trafﬁc Safety,
L. Evans and R. C. Schwing, Eds. New York, NY, USA: Plenum,
1985.
[23] C. Gold, D. Damb¨ock, L. Lorenz, and K. Bengler, “’Take over!’ How long
does it take to get the driver back into the loop?” Proc. Human Factors
Ergonom. Soc. Annu. Meeting, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 1938–1942, 2013.
[24] J. Radlmayr, C. Gold, L. Lorenz, M. Farid, and K. Bengler, “How trafﬁc
situations and non-driving related tasks affect the take-over quality in
highly automated driving,” Proc. Human Factors Ergonom. Soc. Annu.
Meeting, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 2063–2067, 2014.
[25] C. Cabrall et al., “A survey of human machine interfaces in automated
driving,” Manuscript in preparation, 2017.
[26] S. M. Petermeijer, P. Hornberger, I. Ganotis, J. C. de Winter, and K.
J. Bengler, “The design of a vibrotactile seat for conveying take-over
requests in automated driving,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Appl. Human Factors
Ergonom., 2017, pp. 618–630.
[27] W. Narzt et al., “Augmented reality navigation systems,” Universal Access
Inf. Soc., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 177–187, 2006.
[28] M. Sivak, “The information that drivers use: Is it indeed 90% visual?”
Perception, vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 1081–1089, 1996.
[29] S. Petermeijer, P. Bazilinskyy, K. Bengler, and J. de Winter, “Take-over
again: Investigating multimodal and directional TORs to get the driver
back into the loop,” Appl. Ergonom., vol. 62, pp. 204–215, 2017.
[30] K. Suzuki and H. Jansson, “An analysis of driver’s steering behaviour
during auditory or haptic warnings for the designing of lane departure
warning system,” JSAE Rev., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 65–70, 2003.
[31] J. Navarro, F. Mars, J.-M. Hoc, R. Boisliveau, and F. Vienne, “Evaluation
of human-machine cooperation applied to lateral control in car driving,”
in Proc. 16th World Congr. Int. Ergonom. Soc., 2006, pp. 4957–4962.
[32] A. Gallace and C. Spence, In Touch With the Future: The Sense of Touch
From Cognitive Neuroscience to Virtual Reality. London, U.K.: Oxford
Univ. Press, 2014.
[33] F. Meng and C. Spence, “Tactile warning signals for in-vehicle systems,”
Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 75, pp. 333–46, Feb. 2015.
[34] M. A. Nees and B. N. Walker, “Auditory displays for in-vehicle technolo-
gies,” Rev. Human Factors Ergonom., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 58–99, 2011.
[35] D. C. Foyle, R. S. McCann, and S. G. Shelden, “Attentional issues with
superimposed symbology: Formats for scene-linked displays,” in Proc.8th
Int. Symp. Aviation Psychol., vol. 98, pp. 98–103, 1995.
[36] N. A. Stanton and J. Edworthy, Human Factors in Auditory Warnings.
Farnham, U.K.: Ashgate Publ., 1999.
[37] R. Parasuraman, T. B. Sheridan, and C. D. Wickens, “A model for types
and levels of human interaction with automation,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man,
Cybern. A, Syst. Humans, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 286–297, May 2000.
[38] N. A. Stanton, A. Dunoyer, and A. Leatherland, “Detection of new in-path
targets by drivers using stop & go adaptive cruise control,” Appl. Ergonom,
vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 592–601, May 2011.
[39] M. Zimmermann, S. Bauer, N. L¨utteken, I. M. Rothkirch, and K. J. Ben-
gler, “Acting together by mutual control: Evaluation of a multimodal
interaction concept for cooperative driving,” in Proc. IEEE. Int. Conf.
Collaboration Technol. Syst., 2014, pp. 227–235
[40] E. Coelingh, A. Eidehall, and M. Bengtsson, “Collision warning with full
auto brake and pedestrian detection - A practical example of automatic
emergency braking,” in Proc. IEEE 13th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst.,
2010, pp. 155–160.
[41] E. Coelingh, H. Lind, W. Birk, M. Distner, and D. Wetterberg, “Collision
warning with auto brake,” in Proc. FISITA World Automot. Congr., Oct.
22–27, 2006, Paper F2006V130.
[42] V. A. Banks, N. A. Stanton, and C. Harvey, “What the drivers do and do
not tell you: Using verbal protocol analysis to investigate driver behaviour
in emergency situations,” Ergonomics, vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 332–342, 2014.
[43] R. C. McIlroy, N. A. Stanton, L. Godwin, and A. P. Wood, “Encouraging
eco-driving with visual, auditory, and vibrotactile stimuli,” IEEE Trans.
Human-Mach. Syst., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 66–672, Oct. 2016.
[44] B. Israel, Potenziale Eines kontaktanalogen Head-up-Displays F¨ur Den
Serieneinsatz. G¨ottingen, Germany: Cuvillier Verlag, 2012.
[45] L. Lorenz, P. Kerschbaum, and J. Schumann, “Designing take over scenar-
ios for automated driving: How does augmented reality support the driver
to get back into the loop?” in Proc. Human Factors Ergonom. Soc., 2014,
pp. 1681–1685.
[46] R. Parasuraman, R. Molloy, and L. I. Singh, “Performance consequences
of automation-induced ‘complacency’,” Int. J. Aviation Psychol., vol. 3,
pp. 1–23, 1993.
[47] E. L. Wiener and R. E. Curry, “Flight-deck automation: Promises and
problems,” Ergonomics, vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 995–1011, 1980.
[48] A. Haslbeck and H.-J. Hoermann, “Flying the needles ﬂight deck automa-
tion erodes ﬁne-motor ﬂying skills among airline pilots,” Human Factors,
J. Human Factors Ergonom. Soc., vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 533–545, 2016.
[49] N. A. Stanton, M. S. Young, and B. McCaulder, “Drive-by-wire: The case
of mental workload and the ability of the driver to reclaim control,” Saf.
Sci., vol. 27, no. 2/3, pp. 149–159, 1997.
[50] L. J. Skitka, K. L. Mosier, and M. Burdick, “Does automation bias
decision-making?” Int. J. Human-Comput. Stud., vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 991–
1006, 1999.
[51] K. L. Mosier and L. J. Skitka, “Human decision makers and automated
decision aids: Made for each other,” in Proc. Automat. Human Perform.,
Theory Appl., 1996, pp. 201–220.
[52] S. N. Weingart, R. McL Wilson, R. W. Gibberd, and B. Harrison, “Epi-
demiology of medical error,” Western J. Med., vol. 172, no. 6, pp. 390–393,
2000.
[53] A. Eriksson and N. A. Stanton, “Driving performance after self-regulated
control transitions in highly automated vehicles,” Human Factors, vol. 59
no. 8, pp. 1233–1248, 2017.
[54] E. Hollnagel and D. D. Woods, Joint Cognitive Systems Foundations of
Cognitive Systems Engineering. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2005.
[55] P. A. Desmond, P. A. Hancock, and J. L. Monette, “Fatigue and
automation-induced impairments in simulated driving performance,” Hu-
man Perform., User Inf. Highway Des., vol. 1628, pp. 8–14, 1998.
[56] F. Naujoks, C. Mai, and A. Nekum, “The effect of urgency of take-over
requests during highly automated driving under distracted conditions,”
Adv. Human Aspects Transp., vol. 7, no. pt. I, 2014, Art. no. 431.
[57] D. Damb¨ock, K. Bengler, M. Farid, and L. T¨onert, “ ¨Ubernahmezeiten beim
hochautomatisierten Fahren,” Tagung Fahrerassistenz. M¨unchen, vol. 15,
2012.
[58] B. Mok et al., “Emergency, automation off: Unstructured transition timing
for distracted drivers of automated vehicles,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int. Conf.
Intell. Transp. Syst., 2015, pp. 2458–2464.
[59] D. A. Norman, Memory and Attention. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 1976.
[60] J. Engstr¨om, G. Markkula, T. Victor, and N. Merat, “Effects of cognitive
load on driving performance: The cognitive control hypothesis,” Human
Factors, vol. 59, pp. 737–764, 2017.
[61] F. Naujoks, K. Wiedemann, and N. Schomig, “The importance of inter-
ruption management for usefulness and acceptance of automated driving,”
in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. Automot. User Interfaces Interactive Veh. Appl.,
Oldenburg, Germany, 2017, pp. 254–263.
[62] N. L¨utteken, M. Zimmermann, and K. Bengler, “Using gamiﬁcation to
motivate human cooperation in a lane-change scenario,” in Proc. IEEE
19th Int. Conf. Intell. Transp. Syst., 2016, pp. 899–906.
[63] D. Damb¨ock, T. Weißgerber, M. Kienle, and K. Bengler, “Evaluation of
a contact analog head-up display for highly automated driving,” in Proc.
4th Int. Conf. Appl. Human Factors Ergonom., San Francisco, CA, USA,
pp. 6011–6020, 2012.
[64] S. Langlois and B. Soualmi, “Augmented reality versus classical HUD
to take over from automated driving: An aid to smooth reactions and to
anticipate maneuvers,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Intell. Transp. Syst., 2016,
pp. 1571–1578.
[65] J. Lee, M. Mu˜noz, L. Fridman, T. Victor, B. Reimer, and B. Mehler,
“Investigating the correspondence between driver head position and glance
location,” PeerJ Comput. Sci., vol. 4, 2018, Art. no. e146.
[66] J. C. Byers, A. Bittner, and S. Hill, “Traditional and raw task load index
(TLX) correlations: Are paired comparisons necessary,” in Proc. Adv. Ind.
Ergonom. Saf. I, 1989, pp. 481–485.
[67] S. G. Hart and L. E. Staveland, “Development of NASA-TLX (task load in-
dex): Results of empirical and theoretical research,” Adv. Psychol., vol. 52,
pp. 139–183, 1988.
[68] J. D. Van Der Laan, A. Heino, and D. De Waard, “A simple procedure for
the assessment of acceptance of advanced transport telematics,” Transp.
Res. Part C, Emerg. Technol., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 1997.
[69] S. Petermeijer, S. Cieler, and J. de Winter, “Comparing spatially static
and dynamic vibrotactile take-over requests in the driver seat,” Accident
Anal. Prevention, vol. 99, pp. 218–227, 2017.
[70] C. Tanikawa et al., “A genome-wide association study identiﬁes two sus-
ceptibility loci for duodenal ulcer in the Japanese population,” Nature
Genetics, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 430–434, 2012.


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.
12
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON HUMAN-MACHINE SYSTEMS
[71] G. Gibson, “Hints of hidden heritability in GWAS,” Nature Genetics,
vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 558–560, 2010.
[72] M. S. Wogalter, “Technology will revolutionize warnings,” in Proc. Solu-
tions Saf. Technol. Symp., Scottsdale, AZ, USA, 2006.
[73] C. Baber, “Psychological aspects of conventional in-car warning devices,”
in Human Factors in Alarm Design, N. Stanton, Ed. Chicago, IL,USA:
Taylor & Francis, 1994, pp. 193–205.
[74] G. Markkula, J. Engstr¨om, J. Lodin, J. B¨argman, and T. Victor, “A farewell
to brake reaction times? Kinematics-dependent brake response in natural-
istic rear-end emergencies,” Accident Anal. Prevention, vol. 95, pp. 209–
226, 2016.
[75] M. Yeh, C. D. Wickens, and F. J. Seagull, “Target cuing in visual search:
The effects of conformality and display location on the allocation of visual
attention,” Human Factors, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 524–542, 1999.
[76] D. Sperber and D. Wilson, Relevance: Communication and Cognition.
Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell, 1986.
[77] H. P. Grice, “Logic and Conversation,” in Speech Acts, P. Cole and J. L.
Morgan, Eds. New York, NY, USA: Academic Press, 1975, pp. 41–58.
[78] J. Werneke and M. Vollrath, “How to present collision warnings at
intersections?—A comparison of different approaches,” Accident Anal.
Prevention, vol. 52, pp. 91–99, 2013.
[79] F. Schwarz and W. Fastenmeier, “Augmented reality warnings in vehi-
cles: Effects of modality and speciﬁcity on effectiveness,” Accident Anal.
Prevention, vol. 101, pp. 55–66, 2017.
Alexander Eriksson received the M.Sc. degree
in cognitive science from Link¨oping University,
Link¨oping, Sweden, in 2014, and the Ph.D. degree in
human factors from the University of Southampton,
Southampton, U.K., as part of the HF-Auto project,
in 2017.
He is currently a Chief Research Engineer with the
Institute of Transport Economics, Oslo, Norway, and
is the Competence Area Leader in driving simulator
applications with SAFER Vehicle and Trafﬁc Safety
Centre at Chalmers, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Sebastiaan M. Petermeijer received the M.Sc. de-
gree (cum laude) in mechanical engineering from the
Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Nether-
lands, in April 2014, and the Ph.D. degree in human
factors from the Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen,
Munich, Germany, in April 2017.
He is currently a Research Fellow with the Delft
Haptics lab, Delft University of Technology, focus-
ing on haptic human–machine interaction in a highly
automated vehicle.
Markus Zimmermann received the Bachelor’s
degree from the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨at
M¨unchen, Munich, Germany, with a focus on human–
computer interaction. He received the Diploma from
the Center for Digital Technology and Manage-
ment, Munich, Germany in 2011, both in media
informatics.
Since then, he has been with the European re-
search project “Designing Dynamic Distributed Co-
operative Human-Machine Systems (D3CoS)” with
the Institute of Ergonomics, Technische Universit¨at
M¨unchen, Munich, Germany.
Joost C. F. de Winter received the M.Sc. degree
in aerospace engineering and the Ph.D. degree (cum
laude) in mechanical engineering from the Delft Uni-
versity of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands, in
2004 and 2009, respectively.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
Mechanical Engineering Department, Delft Univer-
sity of Technology. His research interests include
human factors and statistical modeling, including
the study of individual differences, driver behav-
ior modeling, multivariate statistics, and research
methodology.
Klaus J. Bengler received the Bachelor’s degree
from the University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Ger-
many, in 1991, and the Ph.D. degree from the Univer-
sity of Regensburg, in cooperation with BMW from
the Institute of Psychology (Prof. M. Zimmermann),
in 1995, both in psychology.
After receiving the Ph.D. degree, he was ac-
tive on topics of software ergonomics and eval-
uation of human–machine interfaces. Since May
2009, he has been the Leader with the Institute
of Ergonomics, Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen,
Munich, Germany, which is active in research areas like digital human
modeling, human–robot cooperation, driver assistance HMI, and human
reliability.
Neville A. Stanton received the Bachelor’s degree
in occupational psychology from the University of
Hull, Hull, U.K., in 1986, the Master’s degree in ap-
plied psychology from Aston University, Birming-
ham, U.K., in 1989, the Doctorate degree in human
factors from Aston University, Birmingham, U.K., in
1993, and the Higher Doctorate degree in human fac-
tors engineering from the University of Southampton,
Southampton, U.K., in 2014.
He is currently a Professor of human factors en-
gineering with the Faculty of Engineering and the
Environment, University of Southampton.


