A Review on the Interface Design of Automotive Head-Up 
Displays for Communicating Safety-Related Information
 
Juhee Park1 and Woojin Park2 
1Department of Industrial Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea 
2Department of Industrial Engineering and Institute for Industrial Systems Innovation, Seoul National 
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
 
 
Automotive head-up displays (HUDs) have the 
advantage of allowing drivers to keep their eyes forward while 
driving by superimposing visual information on top of the 
drivers’ forward field of view (FoV). In order to provide the 
intended advantage, HUDs must be designed such that they 
respect the characteristics and capacities of the human 
information processing system and accommodate the specific 
contexts of information use. Poorly designed HUDs indeed can 
adversely affect driving safety by creating new sets of problems, 
including visual clutter, information overload, inattentive 
blindness and cognitive capture (Gish and Staplin, 1995; Pauzie, 
2015; Tufano, 1997; Ward and Parkes, 1994). 
During the last few decades, various research studies 
have proposed different HUD displays that present HUD 
information in particular styles. However, it is not well 
understood what type of display would be most advantageous 
or adequate for effectively communicating each information 
type and thus best serve drivers in performing the associated 
driving task. Relatively little research has been conducted to 
evaluate the available HUD displays in the interface design.  
 
As an initial effort towards addressing the knowledge 
gap, the objective of the current study was to provide a review 
of the existing HUD displays focusing on the interface design. 
Among the variety of HUD information types, the current 
review was intended to cover different types of safety 
information. For each type of safety information, the HUD 
displays proposed by the automobile industry and academic 
research were examined, in terms of their structures and 
behaviors and also related human factors display design 
principles. On the basis of the review results, this study 
suggests some future research directions that would help 
develop useful and effective HUD displays.     
This study conducted two literature searches, one for 
documents describing existing commercial HUD displays, and, 
the other one for research articles proposing or evaluating 
automotive HUD displays for communicating safety-related 
information. Thirteen major automobile manufacturers 
providing HUD systems, such as Audi, BMW Group, Ford, 
General Motors, Honda, Hyundai/KIA, Jaguar Land Rover, 
Mercedes-Benz, PSA Peugeot Citroen, Renault, SAAB, 
Toyota, and Volvo, were considered. The details of the 
interface designs of the manufacturers’ HUD displays were 
examined using the information provided in the vehicle 
manuals. Research articles were searched by utilizing terms 
describing four concepts: (1) head-up display (head up 
display(s), head-up display(s), HUD(s)), (2) automobiles 
(automotive, vehicle(s), car(s), automobile), (3) interface 
design (display, design, interface, augmented reality, human 
factors, system), and (4) safety information (safety, warning, 
alert). As a result, a total of 15 studies were included in this 
review. 
The review results indicated that safety-related HUD 
displays proposed by academic research studies were mostly 
AR-based and contact-analog. On the other hand, all of the 
commercial safety-related HUD displays were of the 
unregistered type and did not utilize the AR technology. 
It is not clear why the existing commercial HUD displays 
did not adopt the AR technology. Perhaps, it may be due to 
some technological challenges in incorporating the AR 
technology into the automotive HUD system. Alternatively, it 
may be that the efficacy of the AR HUD technology has not 
been confirmed for creating safety-related HUD displays.  
This study examined the HUD displays in terms of the 
human factors display design principles (Wickens et al., 
2003). Many of the proposed displays indeed were based on 
some of the well-known display design principles, such as the 
principles of proximity compatibility, information access cost 
minimization, predictive aiding, color coding and consistency. 
However, the display proposed by George et al. (2012) 
seemed to provide a relatively large amount of information in 
one display. In this case, the legibility of the display may 
decrease and cause confusion in terms of discriminability. In 
addition, visual complexity may increase, which may degrade 
information processing. In dangerous situations, displays 
should be simple and should not require too much perception 
or interpretation. Future research will need to determine to 
what degree the complexity of the display is acceptable in 
hazardous or safety-critical driving situations. Research is also 
needed to identify the individual differences in the acceptance 
levels of visual complexity. 
On the basis of the review results, some future research 
directions were identified:   
z 
Research should attempt to develop design 
principles/guidelines that help designers identify an 
appropriate user interface type when given an 
information characteristic and its usage context. 
ㆍ What are the information characteristics 
suitable for contact-analog and unregistered 
display formats? Which of the two display 
formats would be more effective, under various 
circumstances, especially in situations where 
nearby hazards must be detected quickly? 
z 
Research is needed to investigate how to design and 
evaluate HUDs taking into account the drivers’ 
information processing capabilities under safety-
critical driving situations. 
ㆍ How many HUD displays can be presented 
without exceeding the drivers’ information 
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 2019 Annual Meeting
Copyright 2019 by Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. DOI 10.1177/1071181319631099
2016


processing capabilities under safety-critical 
driving situations? In this regard, what are the 
priority levels of different HUD displays and 
how can they be determined? 
ㆍ What is the acceptable level of visual 
complexity of a single or multiple displays 
within the drivers’ information processing 
capabilities? What are the individual 
differences in the acceptance levels of visual 
complexity? 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Gish, K. W., & Staplin, L. (1995). Human factors aspects of 
using head up displays in automobiles: A review of 
the literature. 
George, P., Thouvenin, I., Fremont, V., & Cherfaoui, V. 
(2012, June). DAARIA: Driver assistance by 
augmented reality for intelligent automobile. 
In Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2012 
IEEE (pp. 1043-1048). IEEE. 
Pauzie, A. (2015, August). Head Up Display in automotive: a 
new reality for the driver. In International 
Conference of Design, User Experience, and 
Usability (pp. 505-516). Springer, Cham. 
Tufano, D. R. (1997). Automotive HUDs: The overlooked 
safety issues. Human factors, 39(2), 303-311. 
Ward, N. J., & Parkes, A. (1994). Head-up displays and their 
automotive application: An overview of human 
factors issues affecting safety. Accident Analysis & 
Prevention, 26(6), 703-717. 
Wickens, C. D., Gordon, S. E., Liu, Y., & Lee, J. (2003). An 
introduction to human factors engineering (2nd ed.). 
 
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 2019 Annual Meeting
2017


