Personal Navi: Beneﬁts of an Augmented Reality
Navigational Aid Using a See-Thru 3D Volumetric HUD
Karlin Bark, Cuong Tran, Kikuo Fujimura, Victor Ng-Thow-Hing
Honda Research Institute USA
425 National Avenue, Mountain View, CA, 94043 USA
kbark, ctran, kfujimura, vng@honda-ri.com
ABSTRACT
Augmented reality (AR) is an interface that can potentially
provide more intuitive and immersive experiences, particu-
larly for automotive applications. In this paper we present the
Personal Navi, a vehicular AR navigational aid designed for
use with a see-thru 3D volumetric Head Up Display (HUD).
In one study, we found that the Personal Navi visuals helped
participants recognize turn locations earlier than when pro-
vided with conventional navigation aids alone. The interface
also helped keep users’ eyes up and ﬁxated on the driving en-
vironment more. In a second study, we tested participants’
depth perception of AR visuals provided with our prototype
3D-HUD. We displayed the same visuals with a ﬁxed focal
depth display (2D-HUD) and found that for applications such
as Personal Navi, where the spatial location of AR visuals are
an important component of the interface, a dynamically ad-
justable focal plane (3D-HUD) is necessary for proper reg-
istration. We argue that AR-based HUD navigational aids
should be implemented only with 3D-HUDs because of in-
ferior depth perception with 2D-HUDs.
Author Keywords
augmented reality; navigation; vehicle; Head Up Display;
depth perception
ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.1.2 User/Machine Systems:
Human factors;
H.5.1
Multimedia Information Systems:
Artiﬁcial, augmented,
and virtual realities;
H.5.2.
User Interfaces:
Evalua-
tion/Methodology
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, augmented reality (AR) has become an in-
creasingly popular interface envisioned for navigational ap-
plications. AR aims to enhance the real world by augment-
ing it with artiﬁcially generated visual, audio, or tactile ele-
ments. Automotive AR can potentially enhance the driver’s
experience by providing a new visual modality that can over-
lay information over the driver’s ﬁeld of view. The immer-
sive nature of AR suggests these interfaces are more suitable
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
AutomotiveUI ’14, September 17 - 19 2014, Seattle, WA, USA.
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-3212-5/14/09...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2667317.2667329
for helping the primary task of driving (direct operation of
the vehicle at various cognitive levels) rather than secondary
(mandatory tasks related to driving like turn signaling) or ter-
tiary tasks (not related to driving such as entertainment) [1].
Speciﬁcally, AR applications can provide situation awareness
without needing to glance away from the windshield (for see-
thru Head Up Displays), use generated computer graphics to
draw the attention of the driver to important events, anno-
tate location-based information on real-world objects in the
driver’s view, and unambiguously provide spatial information
relevant for driver navigation and vehicle operation [1,2].
AR Navigation
Vehicle navigation is a prime application where AR can pro-
vide beneﬁts. In this scenario, AR can reduce the ambiguity
of instructions by directly pointing out intersections and turn
locations in context of what the driver sees. This beneﬁt and
the public’s increasing dependency on GPS systems has re-
sulted in the development of AR applications geared towards
navigation such as iOnRoad and many others. One downside
of these systems is that the AR visuals are overlaid on a sep-
arate camera feed of the visual scene rather than the scene
itself so users are still forced to look at an alternate display,
such as their smartphone, to experience the augmented reality
which can cause driver inattention or distraction.
To address the issue of inattention, other Automotive AR
makes use of see-thru Head Up Displays (HUDs). Although
there are still technical hurdles to overcome before AR-HUDs
are widely adopted, researchers have begun to explore the
usability and effectiveness of these interfaces over conven-
tional display systems. Using a simulated windshield naviga-
tion system, Kim and Dey [3] found that driver’s were able to
reduce navigational errors and distraction measures by reduc-
ing the cognitive load of needing to switch between the real
view and a different map viewpoint. In Frohlich et al. [4],
driving simulation studies showed that in urgent situations,
drivers preferred direct augmented views over conventional
map views. This was also observed in a comparison study be-
tween head-up display (HUD) and head-down display (HDD)
for a simulation experiment with commercial vehicles in Tai-
wan [5]. In particular, drivers in the HUD conﬁguration had
faster response times in response to urgent events, more con-
sistent speed control and less mental stress than the HDD
conﬁguration. Medenica et al. [6] found in simulation that
drivers were able to look at the road more often, drive with
better steering and lane positions than alternative map-based
displays or AR on secondary video displays.
1


AR Navigation Visual Designs
As a new visual modality, methods of providing AR naviga-
tion information are under explored. Currently, the major-
ity of AR navigation interfaces displays a highlighted path
or arrow overlaid directly on the road in front of the driver
[3, 4, 7–10]. Although this design provides intuitive corre-
spondence between the AR visuals and the environment, one
potential drawback of this visual aid is that if another object
or vehicle is in front of the driver, the object occludes the path
or the path is overlaid on top of the object, creating a confus-
ing graphic for the driver. To address this issue, another com-
monly employed visual design is to draw the highlighted path
in the sky, where the path is less likely to interfere with other
objects in the driver’s view [6, 7, 11]. In their observations,
Medenica et al. [6] state that one potential drawback of this
visual is that it may be distracting to have the path highlighted
in a driver’s peripheral view at all times. They also note that
most AR navigation designs do not provide a global overview
of the route and only provides information about what the
driver should be doing at that particular instant. Kim et al. [3]
uses an interesting hybrid design that combines the path on
the road and a global top down view map in the sky, though it
may also be distracting. MVS [12] and Pioneer [13] provide
road directions in the upper portions of the driver’s ﬁeld of
view, removing potential problems with augmented graphics
obstructing actual cars or pedestrians on the road. Drawing
graphics against a sky backdrop can potentially reduce back-
ground clutter as well.
Display Perceptual Issues
The advantages of a HUD over a HDD have been well docu-
mented, showing that users are able to keep their gaze on the
road longer, leading to faster reaction times, improved driving
or task performance, and less mental stress [5,6,14,15]. Cur-
rently, HUDs are more proliﬁc in luxury brand vehicles (e.g.
BMW, Audi, Mercedes, Cadillac, Lexus), but advancements
in display technologies are allowing HUDs to appear in mid-
range vehicles. HUDWAY and Sygic are smartphone naviga-
tion apps that simulate HUDs by reﬂecting their screen on the
windshield. In addition, several secondary add-on or wear-
able HUDs have become commercially available (Garmin,
Pioneer, Google Glass). Although these HUDs provide the
advantages of keeping a driver’s eye gaze near the forward
scene, the visuals are not truly augmenting the environment.
One reason is that the majority of these HUDs have a rela-
tively small ﬁeld of view and can only display images occu-
pying the lower portion of the windshield viewing area, which
makes direct augmentation of the environment difﬁcult.
A more important characteristic of these HUDs are that they
project images at a ﬁxed distance in front of the driver’s eye
(typically around 3 meters). However, the absence of proper
depth perception and focal distance is a safety issue that has
been overlooked [1,16,17]. To properly conceive and design
automotive applications using AR, it is important to review
the research performed so far on the driver’s perception with
these interfaces. Fixing the distance of the images results in
the omission of consistent depth perception cues, which can
lead to discomfort and focus issues [18]. The ﬁxed HUD dis-
tance may also affect the accommodation and perception of
actual objects while driving [16, 19, 20]. In essence, these
types of HUDs require the driver to shift their focus from the
virtual image to the real world scenery, which is often at a dif-
ferent focal distance from the image. In an experiment where
virtual text was presented at far distances, Gupta [20] reported
that the text appeared more blurry to users as the experiment
progressed. She conjectures that the blurry vision was a re-
sult of eye strain due to the repeated need of the eyes to con-
verge and accommodate. One reason these perceptual issues
are often overlooked in research is that most automotive AR
systems are studied using driving simulators, where the road
environment is a 2D projection on a monitor or large screen
and depth cues are not required or present. Therefore, issues
in accommodation or focus switching have gone unnoticed.
Volumetric 3D HUDs that are capable of generating images
at dynamically changing focal planes can eliminate some of
these perceptual issues but the availability of volumetric 3D
HUDs is very limited.
In addition, the perceptual issues related to viewing AR
against a moving, real world backdrop (which describes nor-
mal driving conditions) are relatively unknown. Most auto-
motive AR has been tested indoors due to technological and
safety constraints; however, Livingston et al. [21] performed
AR depth perception experiments both indoors and outdoors
and found that outdoors, users tended to overestimate depth,
while indoors the effects were the opposite. Tonnis [10] also
found that when driving at faster speeds (in simulation), the
perceived distance of AR visuals worsened.
The increase
in speed resulted in faster pixel changes, which affected the
user’s ability to perceive the AR visuals. These perceptual is-
sues must not be overlooked when designing automotive AR
systems and interfaces.
To address some of these perceptual issues, we have built a
prototype volumetric HUD that allows us to generate images
using movable focal planes from 5 m to inﬁnity and a 20 de-
gree ﬁeld of view. The ability to project images at accurate
focal distances from the user’s eyes allows for proper mo-
tion parallax cues without the use of head or eye tracking,
and the prototype allows us to register virtual images to the
real world, reducing visual fatigue. In this prototype, the eye
box is located 60-80 cm from the windshield, and is approx-
imately 150 cm in width. Using this system, we designed
Personal Navi, an AR navigational aid that helps drivers rec-
ognize where to turn quickly and accurately. In this paper, we
demonstrate the promise of our design. In a separate percep-
tual study, we also provide evidence that HUD based AR nav-
igational aids require a 3D display because users are unable
to register images with a traditional 2D HUD at the proper
distances.
3D AR NAVIGATION INTERFACE DESIGN
The main purpose of a navigation system is to provide in-
structions on how to get from one point to another. With the
parameters of our 3D-volumetric HUD, we designed an inter-
face aimed at helping drivers recognize where to turn earlier
and with greater conﬁdence.
In early prototypes, our visual designs resembled the paths
on the road or in the sky, much like [4, 6–11], However, we
2


Figure 1. Personal Navi visual interface. A virtual paper airplane is
shown as a navigation guide and a series of virtual planes show the de-
sired path.
observed that the paths, whether they were on the ground or
in the sky, drew too much attention to the spatial area directly
in front of the driver, and users tended to stare at the visuals.
This tendency was also noted in [6]. To avoid the dangers of
inattentional blindness and based on prior navigation design
ﬁndings [4, 6, 22], we developed a set of guidelines to drive
our design.
• Show where to turn using a perspective view.
• Provide advanced notice about the turns or upcoming in-
structions.
• Only provide visual information when it is needed.
• Do not occlude the driver’s view.
With these rules in mind, we present the current design (Fig.
1). To keep the AR interface simple, we decided that more
complex visuals such as an overview map, should remain on
a secondary display. Audio instructions were not the focus of
our design efforts, so we assumed that standard audio instruc-
tions would be provided as well.
In order to avoid occluding the driver’s view and avoid hav-
ing the visuals interfere with other objects in the environment,
we chose to keep the AR visuals in the sky domain rather than
highlighting the road directly. The idea of providing a guid-
ance avatar for a driver to follow was conceived to provide
some playfulness in the design. Because the visuals appeared
in the sky, a paper airplane was chosen as a simple, intuitive,
model to act as the avatar. To show the driver where to turn,
maneuver, or exit, we show a desired path in the sky with a
series of airplanes that ﬂy out ahead of the driver (Fig. 1). If
the driver is simply going straight or following the road, no
AR visuals are present. Only when a maneuver is impending,
do the AR visuals appear. A typical sequence of events is as
follows:
• As the driver approaches a turn, the audio instructions pro-
vide the earliest warning (”in a quarter mile, turn right”).
• Simultaneously, a paper airplane avatar appears in the sky,
which represents the heading of the driver.
• As the driver approaches the turn, approximately 200-300ft
from the turn, a series of ”future planes” ﬂy out ahead of
the driver to the location of the turn, providing an attention
grabbing cue that the location of the impending maneuver
is near.
• As the driver continues, the future planes are more visible
and the driver’s goal is to have their avatar match the head-
ing of the ghost planes to complete the turn.
We found that this sequence prepared users for an impend-
ing maneuver and helped the driver locate where they needed
to go. A key distinction between this AR interface and ar-
rows that appear on conventional HUD’s is that the virtual
airplanes are spatially co-located with the real environment.
GPS tracking and localization of 3D geometric elements sur-
rounding the vehicle are required to accurately place the air-
planes at correct focal depths ahead of the driver and pro-
vide occlusion cues. This AR can potentially help reduce
distraction by drawing the driver’s attention further ahead
to where they need to go, rather than having the driver fo-
cus on an arrow projected at a focal plane close up and then
transferring their visual attention ahead at the road. A video
demonstrating these visuals can be found here: bender.honda-
ri.com/personalnavi.
INTERFACE DESIGN EVALUATION
To characterize the effectiveness of the Personal Navi inter-
face, we completed a short study comparing how early partic-
ipants recognized where to turn using a traditional navigation
system and a navigation system with our augmented visuals.
We hypothesized that the Personal Navi would help users rec-
ognize where to turn earlier and help keep their eyes on the
road.
Methods
In order to evaluate the interface, participants viewed short
video clips of recorded navigation scenarios. To generate the
videos, we drove a vehicle along a pre-determined route and
simultaneously recorded the driver’s ﬁeld of view and the in-
vehicle navigation system audio and secondary map display
with cameras mounted inside the cabin. The recordings were
synchronized and split into short intervals that captured spe-
ciﬁc navigational instructions. The clip lengths varied due to
the different trafﬁc situations. To simulate the AR visuals, a
graphical overlay adhering to occlusion and perspective cues
was manually added to the video clips in post-processing. We
chose to simulate the driving experience using video record-
ings due to the realism of the scenarios and visuals. It was im-
portant for this study to see how participants would respond
to seeing AR visuals against a real-world backdrop (Fig. 4).
Two visual conditions were tested (AR HUD and No HUD).
The No HUD condition contained only the traditional naviga-
tion interface which was comprised of audio instructions and
a secondary map overview of the desired route. The AR HUD
condition contained the same traditional instructions but also
included simulated AR graphics (Fig. 1). The only difference
between the two conditions was the presence or lack of AR
visuals.
During the experiment, participants were seated in a car seat
positioned approximately 80 cm from a large LCD screen.
The video clips were scaled to approximate real-life propor-
tions as closely as possible on the screen. A separate 7 inch
screen was placed near the bottom right corner of the larger
LCD to display the secondary map view. Audio navigation
3


instructions were played over speakers. During the study, par-
ticipants were also asked to wear a set of SMI Eye Tracking
Glasses (ETG) to record their eye gaze. This setup can be
seen in Fig. 2.
eye tracking glasses
recorded driving video
map on secondary
display
Figure 2. Experiment test setup. Participants were seated in front of a
large display with a smaller display showing the navigation maps.
R
Nine experienced drivers completed the study (2 females, 7
males). Ages ranged from 27 to 45, with an average age of
34.2 ± 7.3. Each participant was asked to view a total of
8 different video clips. For this within subjects study, the
video clips were split into two groups (A and B) to where each
group contained a set of four navigation scenarios. Group A
clips were comprised of: 2 left turns, 1 slight right, and 1
exit off the highway (Clip Nos. 1-4 respectively). Group B
contained: 1 right turn, 1 slight right, 1 left turn, and 1 exit off
the highway (Clip Nos. 5-8 respectively). Participants viewed
clips in either A or B paired with one of the visual conditions
(AR HUD or No HUD), and then viewed the remaining group
paired with the other condition. The conditions and pairings
were counter-balanced to reduce biases due to presentation
order and clip type. It total, four of the nine subjects were
presented with the Group A-AR HUD and Group B-No HUD
pairing and the remaining subjects were presented with the
opposite pairings.
Prior to the data recording, participants viewed a sample clip
of a driving scene to help situate them with the setup and to
explain the task. One practice clip was then shown under both
visual conditions to demonstrate the AR interface and make
sure the participants understood the task. After completing
the practice, the experiment began.
Experiment
Because we hypothesized that the AR HUD interface would
help drivers know where to turn earlier, we recorded the time
at which participants recognized what the navigation system
was instructing them to do. As the video clips played, par-
ticipants were asked to observe the scenario, interpret the au-
dio/visual navigational instructions, and to press a key on a
portable keypad to pause the video when they knew where
the navigation system was taking them. When the video was
paused, the experimenter asked the participant to describe or
indicate visually where the navigation instruction was refer-
ring to. The experimenter recorded whether the response was
correct or incorrect as well as the time at which the participant
pushed the key. The experimenter did not inform the partici-
pants if their answer was correct. Participants were instructed
to continue watching the video and stop the video again if
they changed their mind about the instructed path. It is im-
portant to note that in each of the video clips, the vehicle did
not complete the desired maneuver (e.g. if the instruction was
to turn left, the vehicle in the video did not complete the left
turn). This was done so that participants could not deduce the
navigation instructions from the heading of the vehicle. After
the videos in one visual condition were shown, the videos in
the remaining condition were presented.
Participants then completed a qualitative survey to record
their opinions on the effectiveness of the AR HUD visual in-
terface. The qualitative survey consisted of a series of state-
ments listed below which were rated on a Likert scale rang-
ing from 1 to 7, where 1= strongly disagree and 7=strongly
agree. We also asked participants to provide their ideal com-
bination of feedback modalities (AR HUD, secondary dis-
play, audio) for a navigation system. General comments and
observations were also recorded.
• I liked the AR HUD concept.
• The AR HUD helped me navigate better than using tradi-
tional methods.
• The airplanes obstructed my view in a negative way.
• The AR HUD was distracting and would negatively impact
my driving.
• I think the AR HUD would increase my cognitive load
while driving.
• The AR HUD would make me a more cautious/safer driver.
• The AR HUD was easy to see and understand.
• I felt more conﬁdent about knowing where to turn with the
AR HUD.
• If I had an AR HUD navigation system in my car, I would
use it.
Results
Results were analyzed and compared using a two-way analy-
sis of variance (ANOVA), with two main factors (video clip,
visual interface). We use α = 0.05 to determine signiﬁcance.
Average values are reported with standard deviation when ap-
propriate.
Time to Recognize Turn
The main variable of interest was the time at which partic-
ipants recognized where to turn/exit. When examining the
average recognition times for the different video clips, we
observe that for 5 of the 8 video clips, participants recog-
nized where to turn earlier with the AR HUD interface. Of
these ﬁve situations, the difference in recognition time was
3.2 ± 1.8 seconds, a considerable amount of distance and ad-
vance warning for drivers to make decisions. A summary
of the results is provided in Fig. 3. Statistically, visual in-
terface was found to have a signiﬁcant main effect on the
time at which participants recognized where to turn (p=0.001,
F(1,56) = 11.93, η2 = 0.18). A signiﬁcant interaction between
the clip and visual interface was also found (p<0.04, F(7,56)
4


1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
clip number
time (s)
 
 
HUD
No HUD
Figure 3. Average time at which participants recognized where to turn
for all driving clips. Shorter bars indicate that the participants recog-
nized where to turn earlier. The red dots represent the time at which the
virtual airplanes appeared for the AR HUD condition.
(a)
(b)
exit/planes occluded by overpass
traffic lights visible
Figure 4. Sample screen shots of scenarios were the AR HUD did not
improve recognition time: (a) highway scenario where exit is hidden be-
hind overpass and (b) large intersection where the trafﬁc lights helped
users recognize where to turn.
= 2.34, η2 = 0.23), indicating that the effects of the AR HUD
visuals varied by clip.
Indeed, clips 4 and 8 showed little difference between the AR
HUD and No HUD conditions. The scenario for both these
clips was to exit off a highway. Upon further inspection, we
noticed that the exits were located behind an overpass for both
clips (see Fig. 4a), meaning that the exits were difﬁcult to
see. The virtual airplanes in the AR HUD condition were also
hidden behind the overpass because users were confused in
earlier iterations when the planes were not properly occluded.
Occlusion has been known to be a dominant cue for depth
[23], but occluding the planes to reduce confusion resulted in
participants waiting until the hidden exit was visible before
pressing the key, negating any beneﬁts of the AR visuals. It is
possible that a difference in recognition time would be seen
when the exit is more visible or if the exit location was more
easily indicated using other visual methods.
The scenario (Clip 5) in which participants were able to rec-
ognize where to turn earlier without the AR HUD interface
was a right turn at a heavy intersection. Several aspects of
this scenario likely contributed to the result. As seen in Fig. 3,
users in the No HUD condition were able to recognize where
the turn happened at a time before the virtual planes appeared
(indicated by a red dot) in the AR HUD condition. Partici-
pants in the No HUD condition described the location of the
turn by referring to the large trafﬁc lights and cross trafﬁc that
were visible early on (Fig. 4b). In addition, the participant
could note that there was only one large upcoming intersec-
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
5
10
15
clip number
total time (s)
 
 
HUD
No HUD
Figure 5. Average total time participants spent ﬁxated on the secondary
display for the various video clips with and without the AR HUD inter-
face.
tion from the secondary map and deduce that the instructions
referred to the only visible intersection. It is possible that if
the virtual planes appeared earlier in the AR HUD interface,
the results would have differed. In addition, it points to the
possibility of using other artifacts in the environment, such
as trafﬁc lights or signs, to help the driver interpret where to
turn. The timing at which the virtual planes in the AR HUD
interface appear is an important factor to consider in the sys-
tem.
Overall, the video clips in which there was a bigger difference
between the two conditions were when no clear street signs
were visible, or when the roadways were slightly hidden from
normal view. Additional work to study busier and more urban
intersections should be explored.
Eye gaze
Prior research has shown that one of the major beneﬁts of a
HUD is that time drivers spend with their eyes on the road
ahead is increased with a HUD as compared to a Head Down
Display (HDD) [6,15,24]. Although improved eye gaze alone
does not reduce distraction completely, [6,15,24] also demon-
strate performance beneﬁts related to increased on road eye
gaze. We sought to verify that our AR HUD interface resulted
in similar gaze trends as a preliminary analysis.
Fixation eye gaze data from 8 of the 9 subjects was analyzed.
One subject’s data was removed because the subject forgot
the secondary display was present but did not recall for which
condition. Due to the uncertainty, their data was not included
in the analysis. Overall, the number of ﬁxations on the sec-
ondary display were reduced with the presence of the AR
HUD interface. On average, participants ﬁxated on the sec-
ondary display 12±10.5 more times when the AR HUD inter-
face was not provided. The overall time spent looking at the
secondary display was also less with the AR HUD compared
with the No HUD condition (Fig. 5). The time spent ﬁxated
on the secondary display was on average 3.3 ± 3.0 seconds
more when the AR HUD was not visible. The visual condi-
tion was found to have a signiﬁcant main effect on the num-
ber of ﬁxations at the secondary display (p=0.002, F(1,48) =
28.55, η2 = 0.37). A signiﬁcant interaction between the clip
and visual interface was found (p<0.02, F(7,48) = 2.76, η2 =
0.28). It is not clear why the AR HUD did not help reduce
the ﬁxation durations for Clip 4 (exiting a highway).
5


participant’s view
3D Volumetric 
Head Up Display Unit
virtual paper plane
stanchions
Figure 6. 2D-3D Experiment test setup. Four stanchions are placed at
varying depths and the participant is seated behind the 3D HUD for
viewing.
Survey Results
The average ratings of all nine participants was calculated.
Overall participants rated the AR HUD display favorably
(6.3 ± 0.70), indicating that they liked the concept. They
thought it was effective at providing instructions (6.1±0.93),
increased their conﬁdence in knowing where to turn (6.2 ±
0.97), easy to see and understand (6.6 ± 0.53), and was a
system they would use (6.3 ± 1.0). Participants were neu-
tral (4.3 ± 1.5) on whether or not the AR HUD would make
them more cautious and if the system would increase their
cognitive load (3.8 ± 1.6). They disagreed slightly with the
statements that the AR HUD obstructed their view negatively
(2.6 ± 0.73) or was distracting (2.6 ± 1.4).
In addition, participants were asked if they had an option
between having audio, a secondary map display, and AR
HUD for a navigation system, which combination of feed-
back modalities would be preferred. All participants stated
they would prefer to have the AR HUD. 7 preferred to have
all three modalities, while the remaining 2 participants pre-
ferred to have either audio and AR HUD or secondary map
and AR HUD. The secondary display and audio cues can
provide long-term high level planning while immediate short-
term direct cues are provided by the AR HUD, and we spec-
ulate that users desire both types of cuing for navigation.
DEPTH PERCEPTION EVALUATION
Although the previous video-based experiment demonstrated
the utility of the Personal Navi design, it was limited to dis-
playing a 2D visual overlay on a video recording. The Per-
sonal Navi system is intended for use in the real world which
requires the overlay of graphics on a 3D environment. An
important component of the system design is the ability of
drivers to correlate the AR visuals to spatial locations ahead
of the driver. We hypothesize that this co-located relationship
between the environment and visuals contribute to the intu-
itiveness and effectiveness of the Personal Navi design. As
a preliminary step towards implementation, we determined if
users would be capable of perceiving the location of the vir-
tual airplanes accurately using our see thru 3D HUD. We also
presented the same visuals simulating a standard 2D HUD to
determine if it could also be used to implement the Personal
Navi system.
Setup
In this study, we use our stationary 3D HUD prototype to aug-
ment the real world with a virtual paper airplane in the sky, as
(a) Across
(b) Flyout
Figure 7. Sample image of the graphics viewed from the participant’s
point of view. Paper airplane graphics are overlaid against real-world
environment.
would happen with the Personal Navi interface. We ask par-
ticipants to indicate where in the real world environment they
believe the airplane is hovering over. To generate the visu-
als, we used a 3D combiner-HUD prototype with a dynamic
range of focal depths (Fig. 6).
Four stanchions (labeled 1, 2, 3, 4) were placed outdoors at
distances of 9, 14, 18.7, and 26 meters from the user (Fig. 6).
The stanchions were staggered so that the participants could
easily read the numerical labels. The 3D HUD prototype was
positioned so that the graphics would be overlaid against the
outdoor backdrop (Fig. 6).
Methods
A total of four conditions were tested. Two different visual
conditions and two different animations.
Visual Conditions
We tested participants’ ability to judge the location of the vir-
tual airplanes using both a 2D and 3D HUD. To simulate the
2D HUD system, we ﬁxed the focal plane of our 3D HUD at 9
m, so that the images appeared over the ﬁrst stanchion. In the
3D condition, the focal plane was allowed to move dynami-
cally to the appropriate depths. In both visual conditions, the
size, perspective, and lighting of the visuals were consistent
with a simulated 3D graphical environment and the graphics
presented in each condition were identical. The only differ-
ence was the changing focal plane.
Animations
Because apparent motion of virtual objects can help provide
depth cues, we showed each participant two types of anima-
tions. First a simple animation in which a paper airplane ap-
peared on the left side of the viewing area and ﬂew across
the scene in a straight line (Across), in which case there was
no additional apparent motion cues (Fig. 7a). A second ani-
mation showed the plane ﬂying out into the environment and
changing depth (Flyout) before banking right over a desired
stanchion (Fig. 7b). The virtual plane was clearly visible
throughout it’s trajectory, unobstructed by the stanchion or
other objects.
Experiment
Participants were asked to watch the animations and indicate
which stanchion they believed the virtual airplane was hov-
ering closest to. The animation and visual conditions were
paired to create four different test groups (2D-Across, 3D-
Across, 2D-Flyout, 3D-Flyout). Within each group, partici-
pants were shown animations of the airplane ﬂying over each
6


Across
Flyout
0
20
40
60
80
100
Animation Type
Percentage of correct responses
32%
93%
33%
97%
3D
2D
Figure 8. Percent of correct responses for the various conditions
of the four stanchions, for a total of sixteen trials. The order
in which the airplanes ﬂew over the stanchions was random-
ized within each test group. Each subject experienced all four
groups. The orders in which the visual conditions were pre-
sented were counterbalanced to reduce order biases but the
Across animations were shown prior to the Flyout anima-
tions. After each trial, the experimenter recorded the partic-
ipant’s response. No practice trials were conducted and par-
ticipants were not provided any information about the anima-
tions they would be seeing prior to the experiment. Qualita-
tive observations and comments were also recorded. A video
demonstrating the experiment and conditions can be found at
bender.honda-ri.com/personalnavi.
Results
Data from 15 participants was collected (3 females, 12
males). Participant ages ranged from 27 to 50 with an av-
erage age of 35.3 ± 8.4. To analyze the participants ability to
perceive the location of the virtual airplanes, we determined
the percent of correct responses for the various conditions.
Results were analyzed and compared using a repeated mea-
sures analysis of variance (ANOVA), with two main factors
(visual condition, animation type). We use α = 0.05 to de-
termine signiﬁcance unless noted otherwise. Average values
are reported with standard deviation when appropriate.
The overall results are shown in Fig. 8, where it is clear that
participants were able to perceive the location of the airplane
with much greater accuracy using the 3D HUD as compared
to the 2D HUD. The visual condition (2D vs. 3D) was found
to have a signiﬁcant main effect (p < 7e−10, F(1,14)=218.75,
η2 = 0.94) and the animation type (Across vs. Flyout) did
not have a signiﬁcant effect. No signiﬁcant interactions were
found.
When we examine the breakdown of correct responses ac-
cording to the different stanchions (Fig. 9), it is clear that the
bulk of correct responses under the 2D condition occurred
when the airplane ﬂew over Stanchion 1. This is not surpris-
ing since the focal depth for the 2D condition was placed at
Stanchion 1. However, this breakdown highlights the inabil-
ity of participants to perceive depth of images in a 2D HUD.
1
2
3
4
0
5
10
15
Correct Responses
 
 
2D-Across
2D-Flyout
Stanchion #
Figure 9. Distribution of correct responses according to Stanchion Num-
ber (depth) for both all conditions
For the Across, and 2D condition, several participants com-
mented that although the size of the airplane appeared to be
smaller, the airplane itself did not seem to be ﬂying further
out. The Flyout animation further confounded participants.
They stated that due to the initial outward motion of the tra-
jectory, they anticipated that the airplane would end up hov-
ering over one of the Stanchions further away, yet when the
airplane ﬁnished the trajectory it somehow appeared back at
Stanchion 1. Though the motion cues provided some cogni-
tion of depth, the focal depth cues override size and perspec-
tive cues at the distances tested here.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In the ﬁrst study, we found that the Personal Navi shows
promise in helping drivers recognize where to turn. Although
the results varied according to the scenarios, in general par-
ticipants were able to pinpoint turn locations earlier with the
AR visuals. They were able to keep their eyes up ahead for a
greater amount of time, potentially increasing the likelihood
of detecting other hazards while driving, and they found the
interface intuitive and non-intrusive. The design of the in-
terface can be improved to take advantage of environmental
landmarks such as trafﬁc lights, signs, or overpasses. The
second study showed preliminary steps taken to implement
Personal Navi 3D using our see-thru volumetric 3D HUD.
The lack of depth perception with a ﬁxed distance 2D HUD
is clear and AR interfaces such as the Personal Navi will not
be effective without a 3D HUD. In fact, a 2D HUD can be
quite dangerous and these perceptual issues must be consid-
ered in automotive AR.
Future plans include ecological implementation and testing
of the Personal Navi interface. The increased outdoor stimuli
and cognitive load present during real world driving may af-
fect a driver’s ability to use the Personal Navi. Motion cues
from driving may actually enhance depth perception by of-
fering strong motion parallax cues; however, latency in AR
graphics and asynchrony between the visuals and the moving
environment may cause perceptual issues not seen in these
preliminary studies. Future studies can also demonstrate driv-
ing performance beneﬁts of the HUD Furthermore, percep-
tion of the visuals at greater depth distances will be tested.
We will also optimize when the virtual airplanes appear, and
enhance their saliency by varying sizes and colors. We look
forward to testing the interface in a more realistic setting to
fully demonstrate the effectiveness of our system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank Tom Zamojdo and Chris
Grabowski for their stimulating conversations, sage advice,
and assistance in building our HUD prototypes, Nguyen-Cat
Le for his assistance in preparing the visual materials, and
Nuri Kim for her design insights.
REFERENCES
1. J. Gabbard, G. Fitch, and H. Kim, “Behind the glass:
Driver challenges and opportunities for ar automotive
applications,” Proc. of the IEEE, vol. 102, pp. 124–136,
Feb 2014.
7


2. M. T¨onnis, Towards Automotive Augmented Reality.
PhD thesis, Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, 2008.
3. S. Kim and A. K. Dey, “Simulated augmented reality
windshield display as a cognitive mapping aid for elder
driver navigation,” in Proc. of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’09,
(New York, NY, USA), pp. 133–142, ACM, 2009.
4. P. Froehlich, R. Schatz, P. Leitner, S. Mantler, and
M. Baldauf, “Evaluating realistic visualizations for
safety-related in-car information systems,” in CHI ’10
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI EA ’10, pp. 3847–3852, ACM, 2010.
5. Y.-C. Liu and M.-H. Wen, “Comparison of head-up
display (hud) vs. head-down display (hdd): driving
performance of commercial vehicle operators in taiwan,”
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 679 – 697, 2004.
6. Z. Medenica, A. L. Kun, T. Paek, and O. Palinko,
“Augmented reality vs. street views: A driving simulator
study comparing two emerging navigation aids,” in
Proc. of the 13th International Conference on Human
Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services,
MobileHCI ’11, pp. 265–274, ACM, 2011.
7. K. Akaho, T. Nakagawa, Y. Yamaguchi, K. Kawai,
H. Kato, and S. Nishida, “A study and evaluation on
route guidance of a car navigation system based on
augmented reality,” in Proc. of the 14th International
Conference on Human-computer Interaction, HCII’11,
pp. 357–366, Springer-Verlag, 2011.
8. W. Narzt, G. Pomberger, A. Ferscha, D. Kolb, R. Mller,
J. Wieghardt, H. Hrtner, and C. Lindinger, “A new
visualization concept for navigation systems,” in
User-Centered Interaction Paradigms for Universal
Access in the Information Society, vol. 3196 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pp. 440–451, Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2004.
9. T. Tasaki, A. Moriya, A. Hotta, T. Sasaki, and
H. Okumura, “Depth perception control by hiding
displayed images based on car vibration for monocular
head-up display,” in IEEE International Symposium on
Mixed and Augmented Reality, pp. 323–324, Nov 2012.
10. M. T¨onnis, L. Klein, and G. Klinker, “Perception
thresholds for augmented reality navigation schemes in
large distances,” in 7th IEEE and ACM International
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality,
pp. 189–190, IEEE Computer Society, 2008.
11. Y. Yamaguchi, T. Nakagawa, K. Akaho, M. Honda,
H. Kato, and S. Nishida, “Ar-navi: An in-vehicle
navigation system using video-based augmented reality
technology,” in Human Interface and the Management of
Information. Interacting in Information Environments,
vol. 4558 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pp. 1139–1147, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007.
12. M. V. Solid, “Virtual cable hud.” http://www.mvs.net/,
accessed 7.24.2014.
13. Pioneer, “Cyber navi: Augmented reality head-up
display.” http://pioneer.jp/carrozzeria/cybernavi/avic-
vh0009hud avic-zh0009hud/.
14. K. W. Gish, L. Staplin, J. Stewart, and M. Perel,
“Sensory and cognitive factors affecting automotive
head-up display effectiveness,” Transportation Research
Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board,
vol. 1694, no. 1, pp. 10–19, 1999.
15. M. Ablassmeier, T. Poitschke, F. Wallhoff, K. Bengler,
and G. Rigoll, “Eye gaze studies comparing head-up and
head-down displays in vehicles,” in Multimedia and
Expo, 2007 IEEE International Conference on,
pp. 2250–2252, July 2007.
16. D. R. Tufano, “Automotive huds: The overlooked safety
issues,” Human Factors: The Journal of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol. 39, no. 2,
pp. 303–311, 1997.
17. V. Ng-Thow-Hing, K. Bark, L. Beckwith, C. Tran,
R. Bhandari, and S. Sridhar, “User-centered perspectives
for automotive augmented reality,” in IEEE
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented
Reality, pp. 13–22, Oct 2013.
18. N. Ward and A. Parkes, “Head-Up Displays and their
Automotive Application - An Overview of
Human-Factors Issues Affecting Safety,” Accident
Analysis and Prevention, vol. 26, pp. 703–717, Dec
1994.
19. D. M. Hoffman, A. R. Girshick, K. Akeley, and M. S.
Banks, “Vergence–accommodation conﬂicts hinder
visual performance and cause visual fatigue,” Journal of
vision, vol. 8, no. 3, p. 33, 2008.
20. D. Gupta, “An empirical study of the effects of
context-switch, object distance, and focus depth on
human performance in augmented reality.” M.S. Thesis,
2004.
21. M. Livingston, Z. Ai, J. Swan, and H. Smallman,
“Indoor vs. outdoor depth perception for mobile
augmented reality,” in Virtual Reality Conference, 2009.
VR 2009. IEEE, pp. 55–62, March 2009.
22. J. Lee, J. Forlizzi, and S. E. Hudson, “Iterative design of
move: A situationally appropriate vehicle navigation
system,” International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 198 – 215, 2008.
23. J. E. Cutting and P. M. Vishton, “Chapter 3 -perceiving
layout and knowing distances: The integration, relative
potency, and contextual use of different information
about depth,” in Perception of Space and Motion,
Handbook of Perception and Cognition, pp. 69 – 117,
San Diego: Academic Press, 1995.
24. G. Weinberg, B. Harsham, and Z. Medenica,
“Evaluating the usability of a head-up display for
selection from choice lists in cars,” in Proc. of the 3rd
International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces
and Interactive Vehicular Applications, AutomotiveUI
’11, (New York, NY, USA), pp. 39–46, ACM, 2011.
8


