--- Page 1 ---
Enhancing the Driver Awareness of Pedestrian
using Augmented Reality Cues
Minh Tien Phan, Indira Thouvenin, Vincent Frémont
Abstract—Pedestrian accident is a serious problem for the
society. Pedestrian Collision Warning Systems (PCWS) are
proposed to detect the presence of pedestrians and to warn
the driver about the potential dangers. However, their interfaces
associated with ambiguous alerts can distract drivers and create
more dangers. On the other hand, Augmented Reality (AR)
with Head-Up Display (HUD) interfaces have recently attracted
the attention in the ﬁeld of automotive research as they can
maintain driver’s gaze on the road. In this paper, we design a
new PCWS with the AR cues and propose an experimental to
evaluate the AR cues by assessing the driver’s awareness of a
pedestrian. At this stage, a ﬁxed-based driving simulator is used
for the study. Twenty ﬁve healthy middle-aged licensed drivers
participate in the experiment. A car following task is proposed
as the main driving task. Three levels of the driver’s awareness
of a pedestrian: the perception level, the vigilance level and the
anticipation level are assessed through the observable outcomes.
The results show that the proposed AR cues can enhance the
driver’s awareness of a pedestrian in all the three levels.
Index Terms—Augmented reality, Driver Behaviors; Pedes-
trian Safety; Situation Awareness; Driving Simulation;
I. INTRODUCTION
I
N the domain of Advanced Driver Assistance Systems
(ADAS), a close coupling between vehicle and driver
can be achieved with active interfaces. Recently, several car
manufacturers proposed many developments and commer-
cialization plans about HUDs. This technology creates a new
way for interactions between the driver and the vehicle. The
HUDs can offer drivers various information related to safety
and convenience such as velocity, navigation information,
warning messages, etc. [5], [22], [8]. The HUD reduces the
number and the duration of the driver’s sight deviations from
the road, by projecting the required information directly into
the driver’s line of sight. This allows drivers to receive infor-
mation without lowering their gaze, thus avoiding attention
gaps when taking their eyes off the road to look down at
the driving information [7], [16]. Moreover, by highlighting
important objects or regions, the AR cues help enhancing the
visibility of some important elements in the road scene such
as obstacles or pedestrians. It also helps the driver to do the
right actions to avoid potential dangers.
In particular, pedestrians are known as the most vulnerable
road users, whilst also being the most difﬁcult to observe both
in day and in night conditions [28]. Nowadays, the PCWS are
Phan
Minh
Tien,
Indira
Thouvenin,
Vincent
Frémont
Heudiasyc
Laboratory, University of Technology of Compiegne, France, e-mail:
minh.phan@hds.utc.fr.
able to detect the presence of pedestrians with high accuracy.
Then, they can alert the driver in case of possible accidents
across the beeps and sounds from a small interface posed on
the dashboard [19]. However, the beeps and sound are only
helpful if drivers know what sound means or if the sound
occurs in conjunction with a visual cue [9]. We argue that
the AR cues can give beneﬁts in this kind of application.
Therefore, the ﬁrst objective of this paper is to propose an
augmented reality assistance system that can enhance the
driver’s awareness of a pedestrian.
To the best of our knowledge, the work of Fukagawa et
al. [13] is the only previous work that described the driver’s
awareness of a pedestrian. The authors considered the driver
to be aware of a pedestrian when there was no accident in that
situation. In this study, we propose a deﬁnition of Driver’s
Awareness of a Pedestrian (DAP) based on the Situation
Awareness (SA) concept. In [11], SA is deﬁned with three
levels (perception, comprehension, projection) that describe
how the operators maintain state and future state information
of elements in their environment. In the situation where a
pedestrian appears in front of the vehicle, the DAP is deﬁned
with three levels: The perception level, the vigilance level
and the anticipation level (see Fig. 1). The perception level
can be related to the moment and the period when the driver
ﬁgures out there is a pedestrian on road. The vigilance level
is the ability of the driver to sustain attention to the pedestrian
and his estimation of the possibility that the pedestrian can
cross the road. The anticipation level consists of right actions
that driver chooses to do in that situation such as stopping,
passing by, slowing down or speeding up, etc.
Figure 1: Driver Awareness of Pedestrian (DAP) deﬁnition
The second objective of this paper is to propose an
experimental protocol that allows to evaluate implicitly three
levels of the driver’s awareness of a pedestrian. Finally, by
comparing the DAP between the drivings with and without
AR cues, we can determine costs and beneﬁts of the cues in
the critical situation with pedestrians.
Overall, this paper is organized as follows: Part II presents
some related AR applications in automobile and presents our
2016 IEEE 19th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC)
Windsor Oceanico Hotel, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, November 1-4, 2016
978-1-5090-1889-5/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
1298

--- Page 2 ---
proposed AR-PCW system. Part III presents some related
work in driver’s awareness assessment followed by our exper-
iment design that aims to evaluate the AR cues by assessing
the driver’s awareness of a pedestrian. The experimental
results are showed and discussed in Part IV. Finally, Part
V gives a conclusion and presents some future works of the
study.
II. PROPOSED SYSTEM
A. HUD Prototype and Augmented Reality Cues
According to our knowledge of industrial wind-shield
manufacturing, only a small windshield zone in front of the
driver can be dedicated to the AR zone [6]. Therefore, we
propose to study a HUD combiner that allows to project the
virtual images only on the center part of the windshield (see
Fig. 2b). This part cover about ﬁfteen degree of the driver’s
ﬁeld of view
Concerning the AR cues, we consider to use two cues.
Firstly, we propose a conformal cue which is the bounding
box at the pedestrian position (see Fig. 2a). This cue is
expected to remind that the pedestrian is vulnerable and can
cross the road at any time. Secondly, we propose a non-
conformal cue which is the warning panel. The panel is
displayed at the bottom left of the HUD. In case the system
detects that the situation becomes critical, a yellow pedestrian
warning panel is displayed at the left corner of the HUD.
This cue warns directly driver from the potential accident to
the pedestrian. The yellow color is chosen for two cues, to
convey a warning rather than an immediate threat [4], [14].
Indeed, the non-conformal cues are displayed at a prede-
ﬁned depth (usually2.5m to 4m) on the road in front of the
driver. They are typically used to display the speed or other
vehicle information [3]. The advantage of the non-conformal
displaying is that the driver knows exactly where the cue is
and gets used to it. However, it can create occlusion with the
trafﬁc elements such as precedent cars or obstacles. On the
contrary, a conformal display is represented by the virtual
imagery that is overlaid on the trafﬁc elements . The image
is optically superimposed on the objects it augments [15],
[27]. In the driving context, this type of cue has advantage
to enhance the visibility of the obstacles. In [24], the authors
proposed also to use the bounding box as a conformal aid to
highlight the hazards and to direct the driver attention to them
(see Fig. 2b). The authors found that the static bounding box
was actually related to longer reaction times than using no
cues. In [25], the authors explored the use of bounding boxes
for elderly drivers and found that they improved detection of
hazardous object under low visibility, while not interfering
with the detection of non-hazardous objects.
B. Decision Module
The decision module of the AR-PCW system consists of
deﬁning the rules to execute the visual cues (the bounding
box and the warning panel). The Bounding Box (BB) is
displayed whenever a pedestrian is detected in front of the
driver.
(a) Example of a pedestrian
highlighting [24]
(b) The proposed visual cues for Pedes-
trian Collision Warning Systems.
Figure 2: Augmented reality cues for pedestrian collision
warning systems.
Otherwise, the warning panel is displayed only when
the situation is detected to be critical. At ﬁrst stage, we
consider the Time-To-Collision (TTC) and the distance to
the pedestrian (d) to determine the moment when the warning
panel is displayed (tW P ). By neglecting the pedestrian speed,
the TTC is calculated as follows:
TTC =
d
vveh
(1)
where vveh is the vehicle speed.
Now, let consider TTCcritical and dcritical, which are the
critical Time to Collision and the critical distance to pedes-
trian. The warning panel display moment tW P is computed
as follows:
tW P = min(t(TTCcritical), t(dcritical))
(2)
The choice of TTCcritical is based on the cumulative
human response time distribution. This distribution means the
percentage of population that is able to react to a potential
collision. To summarize, the larger the response time, the
bigger the percentage of population to react on time to the
warning. But a larger response time is expected to lead to
a worse performance of the warning because it can become
annoying to the driver. This distribution is 1.0s, 1.6s, and
2.0s, corresponding to 45%, 80%, and 90% of the population,
respectively [2], [18]. In order to correspond to a large
population, our proposed system is aimed to correspond to
90% of population, so the TTCcritical is chosen to be 2s.
On the other hand, the critical-Distance (dcritical) plays
the role of a safety net to determine the critical situation.
In some cases where the vehicle approaches the pedestrian
with a low speed, the TTCcritical is met when the vehicle
is too close to the pedestrian. For example, when the vehicle
speed (vveh) is about 20km/h ( 5.5m/s) and the TTCcritical
is 2s, the distance is equal to 11m. It is already too close
to the pedestrian. The dcritical should be taken into account
ﬁrst. The dcritical is then chosen to be 16.6m in the cases
when the speed is lower than 30km/h. Finally, the moment
to display the warning panel (tW P ) are given as follows:
tW P = min(t(TTC = 2), t(d = 16.6))
(3)
1299

--- Page 3 ---
III. EXPERIMENTS DESIGN
A. Related Works
A technique called SAGAT (Situation Awareness Global
Assessment Technique) is a global tool developed to access
Situation Awareness (SA) of the cockpit pilots. Endsley
[12] lays out the criteria for SA measurement which has
subsequently become one of the standard instruments. Here,
participants are intermittently queried, in the middle of a
dynamic simulation, about the values of various state pa-
rameters in the process under supervision. In the driving
context, the SAGAT technique has also been used to assess
the driver’s SA at the intersections. In [23], the authors
have created four critical scenarios at the intersections and
provided a questionnaire to evaluate their focus of attention
before accident. This technique is easy to use when one
can build a set of queries about the situation to assess the
driver SA in that speciﬁc situation. However, this technique
is intrusive because the driver has to stop driving to answer
the questions [1]. The participants may need to recall speciﬁc
information on the driving environment from their earlier
performance.
As another approach, the loss of SA can be inferred from
changes in performance on tasks for which good SA is
essential. For example, the freeway driver who pulls into
another lane in front of an overtaking car can be inferred
to have poor SA. This would be an example of an implicit
SA measure. In [17], the authors investigated the effects of
adaptive cruise control (ACC) and mobile phone use on driver
SA and performance in a lead-car following task primarily
involving operational behaviors. Their results revealed that
SA improved with the use of ACC and decreased with use
of the mobile phone under normal driving conditions. In
[20], the authors have used the second task in order to study
the performance of the driver and to assess the Situation
Awareness. At predetermined road points, the choice to
perform an additional task was proposed to the driver. The
possibility of accepting and rejecting the second task was
then given either just before a critical situation or in a non-
critical situation. The driver’s situation awareness is scored
if the driver does not accept the secondary task in critical
situations. The result showed that the driver rejected more
secondary tasks in critical compared than in the non-critical
situations. This technique seems more natural to assess the
driver’s SA. However, the use of a distraction is inappropriate
in driving. The accident happened because of the distraction
and not the driver’s low SA. Moreover, our goal is to evaluate
the visual cues which are provided to the driver during the
driving time. Therefore, providing a visual distraction will
complicate the visual task for the driver and this is not
suitable for our goal.
B. Proposed Method
1) Protocol: The previous works showed that it is more
suitable to measure implicitly the driver’s SA in order to
determine the costs and the beneﬁts of the visual cues in the
driving context. Based on this idea, we propose an exper-
imental protocol to assess implicitly the driver’s awareness
of a pedestrian. This allows to identify the effects of the
proposed AR-PCW system.
In order to assess the driver’s awareness of a pedestrian
(DAP), we create an ambiguous situation with pedestrians. A
lead vehicle following task is proposed as a primary driving
task. Indeed, the participant has to keep a constant distance
with a lead vehicle. Therefore, the ambiguity happens when
the driver enters to a situation where there is a pedestrian
having intention to cross the road. This lead vehicle following
task makes the experience more representative of typical
driving situations and engages drivers so that the pedestrian
would be more difﬁcult to perceive or could be neglected by
the driver.
The Fig. 3 shows the detail of a typical scenario with a
pedestrian. The lead vehicle accelerates randomly when both
vehicles enter into the situation with the pedestrian (from
100m to pedestrian). At this point, the participant has to
choose the right decisions between keeping distance with the
lead vehicle and lifting up the pedestrian crossing.
In the experiment, the participant drives both times with
two conﬁgurations of the system (noAR and AR conﬁgura-
tions). In each driving, there are 23 pedestrians on road at
different point. The positions, the appearances, and the be-
haviors of the pedestrians are randomly changed in different
driving times. The driver is required to press a button placed
on the steering wheel in order to indicate that he has noticed
a pedestrian. The driver’s performance in the lead vehicle
following task and his reactions to avoid the accidents with
the pedestrians are then measured in order to evaluate his
situation awareness.
Before entering to the test, there is a practical session in
which the instructor recommends and trains the driver to
keep a distance about 50m to the lead vehicle. When the
participant feels familiar with the task, he can start the formal
tests. There is no pedestrian in this session.
Figure 3: Typical scenario used in the experiment
2) Apparatus: The experiments are conducted on a driving
simulator manufactured by [21]. This simulator interface is
set up to be the most comfortable as possible in order to
facilitate various conditions of the experiments. The simulator
is conﬁgured as shown in the Fig. 4a. A projector screen is
placed at1.5m in front of the driver with a real steering wheel
mounted at a real comfortable position near the driver. The
1300

--- Page 4 ---
simulator is controlled by the driving engine SCANeR-Studio
[21] which enables to create different driving scenarios as
well as to record all necessary driving data.
We propose a transparency zone (higher opacity) rendered
as a rectangle to simulate a combined HUD. This zone covers
the center part of the driver’s ﬁeld of view. This transparency
zone and the visual cues are supposed to create an impression
of a HUD to the driver (see Fig. 4b).
(a) Experimental Platform
(b) Simulated HUD and AR
cues in the virtual scene
Figure 4: Driving Simulator
3) Participants: The sample involved 27 subjects. Two of
them did not ﬁnish the test due to the driver sickness of the
simulator. All upcoming data refers to the 25 subjects who
ﬁnished the test. All the participants were students, had at
least three years licensed driving and was familiar with the
simulator. Moreover, these participants had no disease about
eye or physic at the moment of the test. They were ranged
from 21 to 35 years old. 21 subjects are male and 4 subjects
are female.
4) Dependent and independent variables.: In this exper-
iment, independent variable includes participants, pedestrian
situations and the head vehicle’s behaviors. We hypothesize
that the system with its AR conﬁguration would help to
enhance the DAP in its three levels. Each level is then eval-
uated through the following outcome measures (dependent
variables):
• Outcomes associated with the perception level: The
Visual Reaction Time (V RT) is considered. The Visual
Reaction Time is the moment (calculated in TTC) when
the driver notices the pedestrian and presses the button.
We expect that the AR cues will enhance the visibility of
the pedestrian and the driver will notice the pedestrian
sooner with AR aids.
• Outcomes associated with the vigilance level: The Head
Vehicle Distance and the Accelerator Pedal Position
(APP) are analyzed. We expect that the driver will be
more vigilant with the aids. This means the Accelerator
Pedal Position is smaller with the AR cues and the Head
Vehicle Distance is shortest with noAR.
• Outcomes associated with the anticipation level: The
number of time the driver brakes urgently (so called
Urgent Braking ) is calculated. We hypothesize that
the driver does more Urgent Braking with the noAR
conﬁguration compared to the drivings with the AR
conﬁguration.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In the result analysis step, we will consider the mean of
each outcome over the participants and over the pedestrian
situations. The differences between the outcomes from the
drivings with two conﬁgurations (noAR and AR) will be
exposed using the one-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA
) tools [26].
A. Outcomes associated to Perception Level
a) Visual Reaction Times (V RT): This outcome is mea-
sured by the instant (calculated in Time-To-Collision) when
the driver presses the button when he notices a pedestrian
in front of the vehicle. Fourteen participants followed the
recommendations and pressed the button when they noticed
the pedestrian. The others just forgot the instructions and
we could not get the V RT data from these participants.
Therefore, we had ﬁnally 14 participants for this result.
The V RT corresponds to the perception level of the DAP.
The Fig 5 exposed the result of V RT for 23 pedestrian
situations whereas the Fig. 9a showed the mean values of
V RT of two conﬁgurations for all pedestrian scenarios.
The ANOVA results conﬁrmed there was a statistically
signiﬁcant difference between the noAR, AR conﬁgurations
(F(1, 642) = 23.46, p < 0.05). In the noAR conﬁguration,
the driver noticed signiﬁcantly lately the pedestrian when
the vehicle is around 3s of TTC to the pedestrian and
the driver noticed the pedestrian around for 4.5s of TTC
with AR conﬁguration. Regarding the Fig. 5, the V RT
values are found different between the pedestrian situations.
This is perhaps due to the difference between the road
situations, pedestrian’s behaviors or the latency in button
presses. However, in every situations, the driver noticed the
pedestrian sooner with AR conﬁguration.
Figure 5: Mean of VRT in each pedestrian situation. The
result showed that, with the AR conﬁguration (in dark color);
the driver noticed earlier the pedestrian.
B. Outcomes associated to Vigilance Level
a) Head Vehicle Distance (HV D): Graphically, head
vehicle following task was performed better with the noAR,
we observed that the driver kept a shortest distance to
the head vehicle ) because they are more concentrate into
task when there is visual cues (see Fig. 6). The ANOVA
results revealed a signiﬁcant difference of HV D between
two conﬁgurations(F(1, 1148) = 13.25, p < 0.05). The test
conﬁrmed that, with the AR conﬁguration, the driver was
1301

--- Page 5 ---
less performing in keeping distance with the lead vehicle
(118m). Thus, he was more vigilant to pedestrians (see Fig.
9b) compared to the noAR conﬁguration (86m).
Figure 6: Head Vehicle Distance for 23 pedestrian situations.
In all pedestrian situations, the distance between two vehicles
is greater with the AR conﬁgurations. The driver seems to
pay less attention on the head vehicle when the aids are on
the pedestrian. The AR aids can direct the driver attention
from the lead vehicle to the pedestrian.
b) Accelerator Pedal Position (APP): In every pedes-
trian situation, the drivers were found to accelerate more
aggressively when the cues were not provided (noAR conﬁg-
uration see Fig. 7). The ANOVA conﬁrmed the difference of
APP between two conﬁgurations (F(1, 1148) = 18.47, p <
0.05). The test revealed that the driver pressed more deeply
the accelerator pedal with noAR. The average of APP with
noAR is equal to0.46 whereas with AR is equal to 0.23. (see
Fig. 9c).
Figure 7: Mean of accelerator pedal position for the two
conﬁgurations for each pedestrian situation. With noAR, the
driver pressed more the accelerator pedal. The AR has effect
on the driver’s acceleration behaviors, the cues encourage the
driver to slow down.
C. Outcomes associated to Anticipation Level
a) Number of Urgent Braking Detected: A braking is
considered to be urgent whenever the force applied on the
pedal is detected to be over 200N at a TTC smaller than
2s. In the total of all the driving test, 72 hard braking were
detected with the noAR conﬁguration, this number was found
for 11 times with AR conﬁguration (see Fig. 9d). The AR
conﬁguration is found having more inﬂuence on the driver’s
awareness.
The Fig. 8 showed the number of urgent braking detected
in each pedestrian situation. With the noAR conﬁguration, we
found more often that the driver brakes urgently in front of
the pedestrians. On the contrary, with the AR conﬁguration,
we found less the urgent braking. Indeed, the AR cues
encouraged the driver to be attentive to pedestrian, more
vigilant and ﬁnally it was found that the driver had a better
anticipation in critical situations.
Figure 8: The Sum of number of times, the urgent braking
was found in three conﬁgurations
D. Subjective results analysis
The Tab. I presented some our questionnaire results. The
questionnaire was given after each driving with AR con-
ﬁguration. The results conﬁrmed mostly the advantage of
the AR conﬁguration. Firstly all the participants feed-backed
that they had driven like in the real life (the question Q01).
This demonstrated that the drivers have felt comfortablywith
the simulator. For the scenario difﬁculty, the lead vehicle
following task was considered as quite difﬁcult (question
Q02), 20/25 participants have answered «difﬁcult», and have
commented that the difﬁculty was because the lead vehicle
reacts too spontaneously. Moreover, 19/25 drivers answered
that they had not tried to catch the lead vehicle (question
Q04) and they had been aware of the pedestrians (answered
as «normal» or «completely»).
For the questions concerning the cues, all the participants
liked to have a HUD and the AR-PCW system on their cars
(question Q05). 17/25 of participants preferred the bounding
box compared to the pedestrian panel (question Q6). They
argued that the bounding box helped them to identify where
the pedestrian was, whereas the pedestrian panel did not and
somehow forced them to brake and make them distracted.
E. Discussion
In this paper, three levels of the driver’s awareness (per-
ception, vigilance and anticipation) have objectively been as-
sessed through the different outcome variables that represent
the interaction between the driver and environment elements
(lead vehicle and pedestrians). This protocol helps to mea-
sure objectively the driver’s situation awareness without any
distraction. The driver can drive normally during the test
and is not interrupted for the questionnaire as using SAGAT
technique.
In the result, the AR aids were found to help the driver
in the perception level, the driver perceived much sooner the
pedestrian. We found the same conclusion with Schall et al.
1302

--- Page 6 ---
(a) VRT
(b) HVD
(c) APP
(d)
Urgent
braking
number
Figure 9: Results in 23 pedestrian situations and 25 participants
Questions
Result
Q01
Do you perform the driving like in real conditions? (Yes/No)
25/25 Yes
Q02
The driving task is difﬁcult? (easy/normal/difﬁcult/)
20/25 difﬁcult
Q03
Are you try to catch the lead vehicle? (Yes/No)
19/25 No
Q04
Are you aware of the pedestrians?(completely/normal/not at all)
4/25 not at all
Q05
Would you like to use this combiner HUD ? (Yes/No)
25/25 Yes
Q06
Which cue do you prefer? (Bounding Box/Warning Panel)
17/25 Box
Table I: Some signiﬁcant questions asked in the questionnaire
[25] that the aids could help the driver to perceive earlier the
hazard. We found the same result as Rusch et al. [24], the
visual aids could potentially direct the driver attention to the
hazard.
Moreover, we found that the AR aids inﬂuenced the
driver’s vigilance. They did not focus only on the head vehi-
cle following task and were more aware of the pedestrians.
The drivers did not brake urgently with the AR aids and were
less aggressively driving in term of speed in the situation with
pedestrian.
However, during the experiment, we have noticed that
the driver’s reactions varied a lot between the situations. In
the results presented above, such as Visual Time Reaction,
Accelerator Pedal Position, etc, the variances were really
important. Indeed, the driver’s awareness changed a lot in
each pedestrian situation and a long the experiment. For the
ﬁrst pedestrians appearing on road, the drivers didn’t care too
much and they were less vigilant, but after certain times that
pedestrians crossed the road, the drivers paid more attention
and were more careful of that. Our technique of assessment
of the driver’s situation awareness necessities a wide range
of situation in order to eliminate the repetition effect on the
results. On the other side, the complexity of situations has to
be the same because it also inﬂuences the results. Moreover,
as human learns and anticipates fast, the driver’s situation
awareness is naturally improved during the experiment.
Since driving is a visual and motor control process, it
is possible that the visual search demands associated with
retrieving information from the displayed aids also degraded
the driving task performance. In [10], the author highlighted
that the automation human aids can cause comparable levels
of distraction on driver navigation. However, It is also im-
portant to remark the different between conformal aids and
non conformal aids. Indeed, the aids in their study is not
conformal which can distract more than the conformal aids.
The non-conformal aids (such as the warning panel) involve
enclosed non-changing opaque rhombus shapes. These non-
conformal aids therefore complicate the driver’s ability to
discriminate information about the targets (pedestrians) in
which the aids highlighted. In contrast, the conformal aids
(such as bounding box around the pedestrian in our work)
were found that it did not produce any negative masking ef-
fects. After the experiment, the participants have commented
that the conformal aids could enhance the awareness without
distracting them.
We have found that the best strategy for building driving
aids for achieving better situation awareness is to focus
on speciﬁc problems where driving accidents are prevalent.
Comparing to the related work, we provide an important
aspect in designing a new ADAS interface that enhance the
driver’s situation awareness. Basically, these previous works
considered subjectively the driver and his inattentive states
such as sleepiness, drowsiness or distracted by hand phone
which are helpful but not sufﬁcient for the pedestrian accident
purposes. The driver could be in normal state but if he
underestimates the danger level of the situation, the accident
can also happen. Therefore, our study is dedicated to the
analysis of the driver interaction in a particular situation such
as with pedestrians. Other critical situations have also been
considered such as entering a intersection or complex danger
scenarios [23], [2].
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, an advanced driving assistance system using
augmented reality cues has been proposed in the pedestrian
safety context. The system highlights the pedestrian presence
by a conformal bounding box. Moreover, it takes into account
the time to collision and alert the driver in case there is
1303

--- Page 7 ---
a potential danger. It is expected to help the driver sooner
identify the pedestrian and be aware of them. The study also
highlighted the importance of validating a ADAS interface
by assessing the driver’s situation awareness while using the
interface. Therefore, an experiment with 25 participants on a
driving simulator was carried out to determine the effects of
the visual cues on the driver in term of his/her awareness of
a pedestrian.
AR cues may offer a promising mean to improve driver
safety. During the experiment, we found out that the driver
can achieve a higher perception level with the AR cues. The
bounding box enhanced the visibility of the pedestrian, the
driver noticed the bounding box where there was probably a
pedestrian before noticing the pedestrian. The driver was also
more vigilant with the AR cues (vigilance level). The cues
somehow put the driver to a sensation that something could
happen such as the pedestrian crossing. It encouraged the
driver slowing down in situations. The results showed that the
driver pressed less the accelerator pedal when the cues were
displayed. In the anticipation level, the urgent braking was an
indication to evaluate the driver’s awareness. The preliminary
result indicated that the driver braked urgently more often
while driving without the aids.
However, these ﬁndings suggests that AR-ADAS merit
further investigation. First of all, the study is based on
a simulator in which the pedestrian detection is totally
accurate which is not the case in reality. We will do a
further analysis of the cues with different levels of pedestrian
detection accuracy. Another experiments with new scenarios
and more participants, and in real driving conditions using
our intelligent vehicle platform1 will be carried out.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was carried out in the framework of the FUI18
SERA project, and the Labex MS2T which is funded by the
French Government, through the program " Investments for
the future” managed by the National Agency for Research
(Reference ANR-11-IDEX-0004-02).
REFERENCES
[1] Amy L Alexander, Christopher D Wickens, and Thomas J Hardy.
Synthetic vision systems: The effects of guidance symbology, display
size, and ﬁeld of view. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society, 47(4):693–707, 2005.
[2] G.S. Aoude, V.R. Desaraju, L.H. Stephens, and J.P. How. Driver be-
havior classiﬁcation at intersections and validation on large naturalistic
data set. Intelligent Transportation Systems, IEEE Transactions on,
13(2):724–736, June 2012.
[3] J Caird, W Horrey, and C Edwards.
Effects of conformal and
nonconformal vision enhancement systems on older-driver perfor-
mance. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
Research Board, (1759):38–45, 2001.
[4] Alphonse Chapanis. Hazards associated with three signal words and
four colours on warning signs. Ergonomics, 37(2):265–275, 1994.
[5] Vassilis Charissis and Stylianos Papanastasiou.
Human–machine
collaboration through vehicle head up display interface.
Cognition,
Technology & Work, 12(1):41–50, 2010.
[6] Continental. Combiner head up display, 2015.
1Robotex,
the
national
network
of
robotics
platforms
http:
//equipex-robotex.fr/
[7] Thomas A Dingus, Melissa C Hulse, Jonathan F Antin, and Walter W
Wierwille. Attentional demand requirements of an automobile moving-
map navigation system.
Transportation Research Part A: General,
23(4):301–315, 1989.
[8] A Doshi, Shinko Yuanhsien Cheng, and M.M. Trivedi. A novel active
heads-up display for driver assistance. Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
Part B: Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on, 39(1):85–93, Feb 2009.
[9] Anup Doshi, Shinko Yuanhsien Cheng, and Mohan Manubhai Trivedi.
A novel active heads-up display for driver assistance. Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics, Part B: Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on, 39(1):85–
93, 2009.
[10] Mary T Dzindolet, Linda G Pierce, Hall P Beck, and Lloyd A
Dawe. The perceived utility of human and automated aids in a visual
detection task. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors
and Ergonomics Society, 44(1):79–94, 2002.
[11] M. R. Endsley. Toward a theory of situation awareness in dynamic
systems.
Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society, 37(1):32–64, 1995.
[12] Mica R Endsley.
Measurement of situation awareness in dynamic
systems.
Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society, 37(1):65–84, 1995.
[13] Y. Fukagawa and K. Yamada. Estimating driver awareness of pedestri-
ans from driving behavior based on a probabilistic model. In Intelligent
Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2013 IEEE, pages 1155–1160, June 2013.
[14] Elisa Drelie Gelasca, Danko Tomasic, and Touradj Ebrahimi. Which
colors best catch your eyes: a subjective study of color saliency. In
Fisrt International Workshop on Video Processing and Quality Metrics
for Consumer Electronics. Citeseer, 2005.
[15] Kenneth W Gish and Loren Staplin. Human factors aspects of using
head up displays in automobiles: A review of the literature. 1995.
[16] Paul Green. The 15-second rule for driver information systems. In
Proceedings of the ITS America Ninth Annual Meeting, 1999.
[17] R Ma and David B Kaber. Situation awareness and driving performance
in a simulated navigation task. Ergonomics, 50(8):1351–1364, 2007.
[18] Shane B McLaughlin, Jonathan M Hankey, and Thomas A Dingus. A
method for evaluating collision avoidance systems using naturalistic
driving data. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 40(1):8–16, 2008.
[19] Mobileye. Mobileye pedestrian collision warning (pcw). Online, 2015.
[20] B. Metz N. Schomig. Three levels of situation awareness in driving
with secondary tasks. Safety Science, 56(0):44 – 51, 2013. Situation
Awareness and Safety.
[21] Oktal.
Driving
simulation
engine
scaner.
http://www.scanersimulation.com, 2015.
[22] Hye Sun Park and Kyong-Ho Kim.
Driver-view based augmented-
reality hud system: concept and background.
In 19th ITS World
Congress, 2012.
[23] Marina Plavši´c, Gudrunk Klinker, and Heiner Bubb. Situation aware-
ness assessment in critical driving situations at intersections by task
and human error analysis. Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manu-
facturing & Service Industries, 20(3):177–191, 2010.
[24] Michelle L. Rusch, Mark C. Schall Jr., Patrick Gavin, John D. Lee,
Jeffrey D. Dawson, Shaun Vecera, and Matthew Rizzo. Directing driver
attention with augmented reality cues. Transportation Research Part
F: Trafﬁc Psychology and Behaviour, 16(0):127 – 137, 2013.
[25] Mark C Schall Jr, Michelle L Rusch, John D Lee, Jeffrey D Dawson,
Geb Thomas, Nazan Aksan, and Matthew Rizzo. Augmented reality
cues and elderly driver hazard perception. Human Factors: The Journal
of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 55(3):643–658, 2013.
[26] Laerd Statistics. One-way anova in spss. Retrieved December, 21:2013,
2013.
[27] Nicholas J Ward and Andrew Parkes.
Head-up displays and their
automotive application: An overview of human factors issues affecting
safety. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 26(6):703–717, 1994.
[28] WHO. World health organization, 2013. global status report on road
safety supporting a decade of action. 2013.
1304
