Virtual Shadow: Making Cross Traffic Dynamics Visible  
through Augmented Reality Head Up Display

Hyungil Kim 
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Virginia Tech.

Objective:  This  work  aims  to  (1)  design  a  novel  driver 
interface  for  cross  traffic  alerts  taking  advantage  of  an 
augmented reality (AR) head-up display (HUD), (2) prototype 
design  ideas  for  a  specific  use-case  of  pedestrian  collision 
warning, and (3) evaluate usability in consideration of unique 
aspects of interaction with AR while driving. 

Background: Current pedestrian collision warning systems 
use either auditory alarms or visual symbols to inform drivers.  
However,  they  cannot  tell  the  driver  where  the  detected 
pedestrians  are  located,  which  is  critical  for  the  driver  to 
respond appropriately. 

Method: Ecological interface design (EID) framework was 
applied  for  interface  design.  Heuristic  walkthrough  by  expert 
evaluators in a driving simulator was conducted for a proof of 
concept, followed by an experimental user study (n = 16) with 
a real-car prototype on a parking lot to demonstrate the benefits 
of the novel interface over an extant interface design.  

Results: A novel driver interface, the virtual shadow which 
makes cross traffic dynamics visible through an AR HUD was 
proposed. A series of usability evaluation showed that the new 
interface outperformed the current pedestrian collision warning 
in driver’s attention management, situation awareness, reaction 
with  reduced  workload.  It  also  showed  reduced  max. 
deceleration and stopping distance while braking. 

Conclusion:  AR  pedestrian  collision  warning  that  are 
compatible  with  both  the  driver’s  cognitive  process  and 
physical  reality  of  driving,  has  potential  benefits  for  driver 
performance and braking behavior. 

Impact  and  Contribution:  This  work  demonstrates  the 
opportunity of incorporating EID into interface design for AR 
applications.  The  proposed  approaches  for  design,  prototype 
and usability evaluation can be leveraged by future researchers 
and  designers  to  create  more  reliable  and  safer  AR  interfaces 
for vehicle drivers. 

Keywords: driver vehicle interface, augmented reality, head-
up display, ecological interface design, pedestrian collision 
warning 

INTRODUCTION 

According to the US Department of Transportation, in 2012 
alone,  4,743  pedestrians  were  killed  and  an  estimated  76,000 
were injured in traffic crashes in the United States. On average, 
a  pedestrian  was  killed  every  2  hours  and  injured  every  7 
minutes  in  traffic  crashes  (NHTSA,  2014).  Most  common 
contributing  factors  for  pedestrian  fatality  (NHTSA,  2014) 
suggest  that  drivers  failed  to  appropriately  detect  pedestrians 
due to low visibility (16%, e.g., dark clothing, no light, etc.) or 
unexpected  appearance  of  pedestrians  (46%,  e.g.,  improper 
in  roadway).  Therefore,  automakers 
crossing  or  being 

introduced  pedestrian  collision  warning  taking  advantage  of 
recent advances in sensor technology and pedestrian detection 
algorithms. Once pedestrians are detected in the vehicle’s path, 
the  warning  is  given  to  the  driver  typically  through  auditory 
alarms  or  simple  visual  symbols.  Since  such  warnings  often 
lack  spatial  information,  drivers  need  to  further  localize  (i.e., 
recognize  direction  and  distance  of)  approaching  pedestrians 
for appropriate decision and reaction. Augmented reality (AR) 
heads-up display (HUD) is one of the promising technologies 
to address this problem by overlaying virtual graphics on top of 
vehicle’s  path  to  notify  the  driver  of  the  specific  location  of 
detected pedestrians.  

However, user interface design for AR applications has an 
inherently unique challenge; users must interact with not only 
information on the display but also environmental changes in 
the  real  world.  Moreover,  traditional  user-centered  design 
(UCD) approaches that focus on human-computer interaction, 
may  not  always  adequately  address  the  dynamic  nature  of 
human-environment  interaction.  As  such,  we  propose  to 
incorporate ecological interface design (EID) into AR interface 
design  to  complement  UCD  approaches.  EID  is  a  framework 
for  interface  design  that  respects  dynamic,  environmental 
constraints  imposed  on  users’  behavior.  EID  addresses  two 
questions  for  interface  design;  what  information  should  be 
displayed  (the  content  and  structure  of  information  that 
represent physical reality of the work environment), and how 
that information should be presented (the perceptual forms of 
information 
interface  elements  compatible  with  human 
processing) (Burns & Hajdukiewicz, 2013).  

EID has been successfully applied to many domains such as 
telecommunication,  aviation,  nuclear  power  plant  operation, 
manufacturing process control, healthcare and medicine (Burns 
& Hajdukiewicz, 2013). In the driving domain, Seppelt and Lee 
(2007)  designed  an  in-vehicle  display  for  adaptive  cruise 
control  that  presents  emergent  shapes  depending  upon  the 
relationship between the driver’s car and the lead vehicle (time 
to collision and timed head way). A similar approach for lane 
change warning revealed that EID-based designs outperformed 
an existing design in driver judgement accuracy and confidence 
(Lee, Hoffman, Stoner, Seppelt, & Brown, 2006). In spite of the 
documented  and  perceived  benefits  of  AR,  there  is  little 
research  or  practical  efforts  to  incorporate  EID  into  AR 
interface  design.  Kruit  et  al.  adopted  EID  to  design  an  AR 
HUD-based rally car driver support system that depicts an ideal, 
predicted  path  of  the  car  and  boundary  curve  to  show  the 
capability and limitation of the car. However, the effect of the 
new  interface  design  on  user  performance  was  not  reported 
(Kruit, Amelink, Mulder, & van Paassen, 2005).  

We  purport  that  EID  is  likely  well-suited  to  AR  interface 
design for vehicle drivers, since driving is a spatiotemporal task 
that demands drivers’ appropriate information processing and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
responses to dynamic environmental changes. Furthermore, the 
EID leverages an established benefit of AR– namely, the ability 
to overlay information directly onto real-world objects, thereby 
affording  direct  perception  of  both  virtual  and  real-world 
information.  

Taking  advantages  of  AR  HUDs,  this  work  applied  EID 
framework to design a novel interface that casts virtual shadows 
of approaching obstacles through an AR HUD, prototyped this 
idea for a specific use-case of pedestrian collision warning, and 
evaluated usability of the new interface as compared to extant 
interface designs. 

INTERFACE DESIGN 

Identifying Information Requirements 

begin 

Whereas 

approaches 

traditional  UCD 

by 
understanding  the  user,  EID  argues  that  the  interface  design 
should  start  from  examining  the  work  environment  (physical 
and  social  reality  of  work  domain)  and  finish  by  examining 
users’  cognitive  process  (mental  models,  strategies  and 
preferences) especially when users’ goal-directed behaviors are 
highly affected by dynamic environmental constraints (Vicente, 
1999).  Therefore,  we  started  with  a  work  domain  analysis 
(WDA) to capture the physical reality of driving. 
     Gibson  and  Crooks  (1938)  conducted  insightful  and 
comprehensive  theoretical  analysis  on  automobile  driving. 
They  defined  driving  as  a  matter  of  moving  toward  the 
destination while keeping the car running within the field of safe 
travel  (FoST).  It  is  a  kind  of  invisible  tongue  protruding 
forward  along  the  road  within  which  certain  behavior  is 
possible without collision. At every moment, the driver’s FoST 
can be bounded and shaped by external or internal constraints. 
External  constraints  include  stationary  obstacles  (e.g.,  road 
geometry), moving obstacles (e.g., other vehicles, pedestrians 
and  animals),  and  legal  obstacles  (e.g.,  traffic  signals,  road 
signs and markings). The internal constraints (limitation of the 
car’s moving capability), such as the minimum braking distance 
and  inflexibility  in  sharp  turns  at  high  speed,  can  contract  or 
shear  off  drivers’  FoST.  The  FoST  exists  objectively  as  an 
actual  field  regardless  of  whether  the  driver  perceives  it 
correctly or not (Gibson & Crooks, 1938). It is notable that the 

effect  of  moving  obstacles  on  the  driver’s  FoST  can  be 
estimated by not only a projection of a moving obstacle but also 
the projection of the driver’s own car to the point of intersection 
of the two paths (Gibson & Crooks, 1938). 

Motivated by Gibson and Crooks’s work, we analyzed the 
work  domain  of  driving  and  represented  it  into  a  two-
dimensional  space  that  consists  of  an  abstraction  hierarchy 
(AH) and decomposition hierarchy (DH) as shown in Table 1. 
AH  reveals  the  means-ends  relationship  among  functional 
components  while  DH  decomposes  the  system  into  physical 
components  with  part-hole  relationships.  In  the  part-hole 
dimension, the system boundary was defined as the near traffic 
of  the  car  and  decomposed  into  lower  level  components 
including  the  driver’s  own  car,  moving,  stationary  and  legal 
obstacles.  In  the  means-ends  dimension,  ‘safe  transportation’ 
was selected as the reason for the system’s existence (functional 
purpose).  We chose ‘safe transportation’ over other candidates 
(e.g.,  fast,  fun,  or  comfortable  transportation)  because  we  are 
interested  in  collision  avoidance.  Safe  transportation  means 
maintaining  separation  from  obstacles  for  enough  FoST.  For 
safe  transportation,  we  should  comply  with  the  social  law  of 
traffic rules and physical law of dynamics (abstract function). 
Compliance  of  those  laws  can  be  accomplished  by  actual 
process  of 
locomotion 
traffic  control  and  road  actors’ 
(generalized  function).  The  system  components  (physical 
function)  that  contributed  to  the  process  are  the  road  signs, 
traffic signals, roadways and road actors including the driver’s 
own  car.  Finally,  physical  form  of  each  component  can  be 
described by its perceptual appearance.  

 To make sure the whole system is working properly (safe 
transportation),  we  need  to  know  the  system  states  with 
information 
measurable  variables.  Table  2  summarizes 
requirements:  contents  (which  variables  should  be  measured) 
and structure (what relationships should be maintained for safe 
driving). The variables were identified by asking “How could 
we  measure  each  level  in  AH?”.  At  the  highest  level,  safe 
transportation  can be  measured  by  enough  separation  or  gaps 
(e.g.,  headway  or  time  to  collision)  among  road  actors.  Road 
actors’  movement  can  be  measured  and  predicted  from 
variables such as position, velocity, and acceleration. Each road 
actor  can  be  characterized  by  moving  capability  such  as 
maximum  speed,  minimum  braking  distance,  or  maximum 
acceleration  /  deceleration.  Finally,  perceptual  appearance  of 

Table 1. The result of work domain analysis represented in abstraction-
decomposition space for safe transportation 

Table 2. Information requirements for safe transportation: information contents 
(work domain variables) and structure (relations / constraints among variables) 

 
 
 
 
 
each  component  is  quantified  by  its  shape  and  size.  Most 
importantly,  all  the  defined  variables  cannot  be  out  of  each 
component’s  capability  (single  variable  constraints)  and  are 
related  to  each  other  (multivariate  constraints)  to  avoid 
collisions governed by physical law of dynamics.  

Ecological Interface Design 

Task  demands  of  driving  impose  unique  constraints  on  the 
driver’s  cognitive  process;  they  cannot  allocate  all  attention 
resources to interactions with interfaces. Therefore, we should 
carefully display correct information with the most appropriate 
ways,  timing,  and  placement.  Furthermore,  outdoor  use  of 
optical  see-through  AR  HUDs  made  us  consider  additional 
design factors for our interface design. All design factors can 
be embodied in our design metaphor as a whole. 

•  Frame of reference is one of the most important factors in AR 
graphics design. Graphics can be shown in exocentric (e.g., 
top down view) or egocentric (from the user’s perspective) 
manner.  

•  Registration (or location) of graphics is another critical factor 
(Gabbard,  Fitch,  &  Kim,  2014).  Graphics  can  be  directly 
attached  to  real  world  target  objects  (world-fixed  or 
conformal),  fixed  to  certain  locations  on  the  display 
regardless of the targets (screen-fixed) or associated with, but 
not directly attached to, the targets (world-associated). 

•  Information density is amount of graphics to be shown at a 

given time and space; 

•  Shape of graphics should embody design metaphors for ease 

of understanding; 

•  Size  of  the  graphics  is  important  for  cue  visibility  and 

occlusion of drivers’ field of view;  

•  Color  and  brightness  can  contribute  to  perceived  meaning 

and visibility of graphics; 

•  Intensity  (or  transparency)  of  the  graphics  is  critical 
especially  in  optical  see-through  AR  displays  not  only  for 
their visibility but also visibility of the target objects behind 
the graphics; and; 

•  Timing  of  AR  interface  cues  is  a  key  design  factor  for 

appropriate attention guidance and decision support. 

EID  provides 

information  should  be  displayed 

the  SRK  (Skills,  Rules,  Knowledge) 
taxonomy  of  human  cognitive  control  to  help  designers 
determine  how 
to  be 
compatible with the various mechanisms that people have for 
processing  information.  A  skill-based  behavior  (SBB)  is  a 
sensorimotor  behavior  based  on  real  time  processing  of 
environmental  changes  with  little  or  no  conscious  attention. 
SBB can be supported by direct perception and interaction via 
time-space  signals.  A  rule-based  behavior  (RBB)  is  an 
appropriate reaction to a familiar cue in the environment based 
on  the  stored  rules.  RBB  can  be  supported  by  one-to-one 
mapping  between  work  domain  constraints  to  signs  in  the 
interface. A knowledge-based behavior (KBB) requires analytic 
reasoning  based  on  a  mental  model  typically  in  unfamiliar 
situations. KBB can be supported by externalized work domain 
models  (i.e.,  visualization  of  goal-relevant  constraints)  in  the 
form  of  structured  symbols.  EID  argues  that  interface  design 
should reduce the user’s cognitive load by transforming higher 
level  cognitive  demands  to  lower  level  ones  while  still 
supporting  all  three  levels  that  allow  users  to  cope  with 
unanticipated events (Vicente, 1999). 

 EID  helped  us  design  a  novel  interface  that  casts  virtual 
shadows of approaching obstacles that are immersed in the real 
world,  taking  advantage  of  AR  HUDs.  To  support  SBB,  we 
present the shadow in egocentric frame of reference for direct 
perception  from  the  driver’s  perspective  (Figure  2).  For  the 
registration of AR cues, we present the shadow in a world-fixed 
manner  such  that  it  moves  along  with  the  target  obstacle  and 
appears larger as the driver approaches. RBB can be supported 
by a clear sign of collision. This is realized by associating work 
domain  variables  and  constraints  (identified  in  Table  2)  with 
perceptual forms of interface elements (Figure 1). The location 
of  the  circle  shows  the  predicted  location  of  collision.  The 
shape and size of a virtual shadow reflects the type and size of 
an approaching obstacle. The direction of the tether depicts the 
direction from which the obstacle is approaching. The length of 
the  tether  indicates  expected  spatial  intrusion  by  a  detected 
obstacle  when  the  car  would  arrive  at  the  intersection  of  the 
obstacle’s path. The red color of the shadow warns the driver 
of  an  urgent  situation  that  requires  an  immediate  response. 
Finally, KBB can be supported by visualizing the dynamics of 
the spatial gap between the driver’s car and moving obstacles 

Figure 1. Virtual shadow design metaphor: mapping between perceptual forms 
of interface elements and work domain variables & constraints. The field of safe 
travel and stopping zone are adapted from (Gibson & Crooks, 1938) 

Figure 2. Prototypes of two design metaphors; bounding boxes (top) highlight 
detected  pedestrians  and  the  virtual  shadow  (bottom) visualizes  dynamics of 
spatial intrusion by the approaching pedestrian. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
over time (as the car moves). We propose that repeated use of 
this AR interface would help drivers develop an accurate mental 
model of the dynamic environment (especially with respect to 
drivers’ time-distance judgments between own-car and moving 
obstacles). 

STUDY 1: ANALYTIC USABILITY EVALUATION 

The  purpose  of  the  analytic  usability  evaluation  was  a 
validation  of  the  new  design  concept  with  rapid  prototypes 
before  empirical  evaluations  with  a  high  fidelity  prototype. 
Therefore,  we  conducted  a  heuristic  walkthrough  where 
heuristics and representative scenarios are given to the expert 
evaluators (Sears, 1997). 

Apparatus 

We  considered  requirements  for  the  fidelity  of  our  early 
prototypes;  The  interface  should  interact  with  environmental 
changes  while  driving;  The  driving  scenario  should  be 
representative  and  realistic.  Users  should  be  able  to  interact 
with the prototype in a safe driving environment. And finally, 
the prototype should be easy to change for design iterations. 

Keeping  these  requirements  in  mind,  the  design  idea  was 
realized  by  a  rapid  prototyping  technique  using  augmented 
video  (Soro,  Rakotonirainy,  Schroeter,  &  Wollstdter,  2014). 
Computer generated graphics were overlaid atop pre-recorded 
driving  video  footage  by  a  video  editing  tool.  To  explore  the 
potential opportunity of EID-informed designs as compared to 
currently available driver interfaces, we prototyped this idea for 
a  specific  use-case  of  pedestrian  collision  warning.  First,  we 
prototyped  an  extant  bounding  box  metaphor  that  highlights 
any detected pedestrians present within the pedestrian detection 
system’s field of view (Benenson, Omran, Hosang, & Schiele, 

2014).  Then 
prototyped with the same driving scenario (Figure 2). 

the  virtual  shadow  design  metaphor  was 

As  described  earlier,  the  spatial  gap  between  the  driver’s 
own car and a moving obstacle is continuously changing as a 
function of the both moving objects’ position and speed. The 
virtual shadow visualizes this gap by showing spatial intrusion 
by  the  obstacle  (see  the  equation  in  Figure  1).  Figure  3 
compares two typical examples of virtual shadow dynamics. If 
the  driver  decelerates  to  avoid  collision,  the  shadow  of  the 
approaching pedestrian will go further and disappear when the 
shadow leaves the vehicle’s path (Figure 3a). On the other hand, 
in some cases drivers may avoid collision by accelerating the 
car. Then the shadow of the pedestrian shrinks back (Figure 3b) 
since the pedestrian will not get to the vehicle’s path when the 
driver would pass the intersection of the two paths (pedestrian 
and own-car paths).  

Procedure 

We  invited  four  experts  (working  professionals  and 
graduate students) who meet requirements for our institution’s 
certificate in Human-Computer Interaction and have experience 
in  AR  research.  The  heuristic  evaluation  consisted  of  four 
sessions.  In  the  practice  session,  we  briefly  explained  the 
procedure,  interface  design  concepts  and  had  experts  get 
familiar with the driving simulator. In the walkthrough session, 
experts  were  asked  to  drive  the  car  while  using  different 
interface  designs  (bounding  box  and  virtual  shadow).  In  the 
evaluation  session,  experts  evaluated  interfaces  by  predicting 
driver performance based on heuristics and their own expertise. 
Finally,  in  the  retrospective  think  aloud  session,  we  replayed 
driving  scenarios  for  each  interface  design  and  let  experts 
reflect and think more deeply about interface designs. Experts 
gave  comments  on  any  usability  concerns,  and  design 
improvement ideas. At the end of each session, we let experts 
explain  the  rationale  behind  their  scores  by  asking  “which 
design factors (see previous section) positively and negatively 
affected your ratings?” 

For  the  walk  through  session,  augmented  video  combined 
with a high fidelity driving simulator was used (Figure 4). For 
a  more  immersive  driving  experience,  we  presented  a  small 
crosshair  on  the  driving  scene  that  was  controlled  by  the 
steering wheel. During the driving session, we asked experts to 
match the crosshair to the center of their driving lane. Experts 

(a)

deceleration                            (b)    acceleration 
Figure 3. The virtual shadow in action. Two examples show how the driver’s 
reaction affect interface dynamics (from the top to the bottom t0->t1->t2->t3). 
(a)  the  shadow  starts  stretching  when  the  driver  decelerates  and  disappears 
when the project of the pedestrian is beyond the vehicle’s path; (b) the shadow 
starts  shrinking  back  to  the  pedestrian  and  disappears  when  the  driver 
accelerates so that the project of the car is beyond the pedestrian’s path. 

Figure 4. A high fidelity driving simulator combined with synthesized driving 
video  footage  provided  immersive  driving  experience  and  served  as  an 
appropriate tool for usability evaluation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were also asked to follow driving direction provided by voice 
instructions that mimic GPS navigation aids. Furthermore, we 
asked experts to manipulate any required controls (e.g., pedals 
and turn signals) as they usually drive and as prescribed by the 
video  (e.g.,  when  the  video  shows  car  turning,  experts  were 
expected to use the turn signals and steering wheel). 

Measures 

The  heuristics  used  aimed  to  predict  driver  workload  and 
performance  at  each  stage  of  human  information  processing 
(Wickens & Hollands, 2000). Thus, experts’ predictions were 
focused on cognitive processes such as: 

•  Attention-selective;  the  information  would  catch  the  user’s 

attention quickly   

•  Attention-divided;  the  information  would  not  narrow  the 

user’s attention  

•  Sensation;  the  information  would  be  salient  enough  to  be 

sensed against the background 

•  Situation  awareness-perception;  the  information  would 
guide the user’s attention to the relevant elements in a given 
context (the visuals would help the driver detect pedestrians) 
•  Situation awareness-comprehension; the information would 
help  the  user  understand  the  consequence  of  the  perceived 
elements  (the  visuals  would  help  the  driver  identify 
dangerous pedestrians) 

•  Situation awareness-projection; the information would help 
the user project relevant environmental elements’ status into 
the  future  (the  visuals  would  help  the  driver  predict  the 
dangerous pedestrians’ movement) 

•  Decision;  the  information  would  help  the  user  recognize 

possible reactions and the urgency of reactions 

•  Workload; the information would help reduce task demands 

and the user’s effort to complete the task  

For  each  of  the  above  categories,  experts  were  asked  to  give 
scores  by  predicting  driver  performance  compared  to  the 
control condition (not having any warnings): -3 strongly worse, 
0 the same, 3 strongly better than the base line. 

Results 

Evaluation  findings  suggest  the  virtual  shadow  should 
outperform  the  control  condition  in  all  aspects  addressed  by 
heuristics  whereas  the  bounding  box  is  expected  to  distract 
drivers from critical real world events and not afford reduced 
workload in monitoring hazardous pedestrians (Figure 5).  

Figure  5.  Predicted  user  performance  and  workload  by  usability  experts  as 
compared to the control condition (no visual warning)  

Table 3. Mapping between predicted user performance and contributing 
design factors of the virtual shadow 

Experts’  comments  during  the  retrospective  think  aloud 
were captured into a matrix to visualize relationships between 
user  performance  and  interface  design  factors  (Table  3).  A 
common  comment  from  experts  was  that  the  virtual  shadow 
would  be  more  comfortable  and  decrease  mental  workload, 
because of an effect of the appropriate timing and information 
density (minimal number of graphics). The positive effects of 
the size, position, and color were that the growth and movement 
of the shadow would catch the driver’s attention and help with 
perception. Experts expected that there could be potential issues 
from some of the current design factors. The shape and length 
of  a  tether  could  be  an  issue  if  the  driver  cannot  tell  which 
pedestrian a tether is attached to.  

Discussion 

The  usability  evaluation  revealed  that  the  virtual  shadow 
would  likely  improve  driver  performance  at  each  stage  of 
cognitive  processing.  Regarding  driver  attention,  results 
suggest that the bounding box would guide driver attention to 
pedestrians  but  then  distract  drivers  from  other  critical 
environmental  elements  by  narrowing  their  attention.  This 
finding  resonates  with  the  well-known  tradeoff  between  cost 
(worse divided attention) and benefit (better selective attention) 
of attentional guidance (Wickens & Hollands, 2000) and one of 
in  AR  applications  (e.g., 
the  most  challenging 
highlighting  lane  markers  reduced  pedestrian  detection  at 
nighttime  driving,  Sharfi  and  Shinar  (2014).  Conversely,  the 
virtual shadow is expected to achieve these two contradicting 
goals by cueing only pedestrians who are expected to intrude 
the  vehicle’s  path.  Regarding  driver  situation  awareness,  the 
virtual  shadow  is  expected  to  help  drivers  identify  dangerous 
pedestrians  and  predict  their  movements  for  appropriate 
decision  and  response.  With  the  bounding  box,  however, 
drivers would need to filter out dangerous pedestrians among 
the  clutter  and  predict  their  movement  based  on  drivers’ 
experience or expertise.  

issues 

More importantly, the novel design metaphor would allow 
drivers to accurately predict possible collisions by visualizing 
the invisible mechanism of collision (see the equation in Figure 
1) in the form of a familiar shadow metaphor. Moreover, drivers 
could do so by relying on lower level perceptual process rather 
than high level analytic mental computation. Therefore, more 
attentional resources may be reserved for drivers to deploy their 
attention  broadly  across  other  environmental  elements  that 
might  be  critical  or  important  in  a  given  driving  context.  As 
such, the virtual shadow balances cost and benefit of attentional 
guidance.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Two interface designs implemented in (a) the in-vehicle volumetric HUD prototype: (b) traditional warning, and (c) virtual shadow 

 STUDY 2: EMPIRICAL USABILITY EVALUATION 

The objective of the empirical user study was to demonstrate 
the  benefit  of  the  new  interface  by  answering  two  questions 
regarding pedestrian collision warning; (1) Can visual warnings 
on  HUDs  improve  driver  performance?  (2)  Can  spatial 
information provided by AR HUDs change braking behavior? 
To answer those questions, we ran an experimental user study.  

Apparatus 

Design ideas were implemented on an in-vehicle volumetric 
HUD that can show computer graphics at variable depths from 
8m to optical infinity with about 17° field of view (Figure 6.a). 
Volumetric displays form a visual representation of an object in 
a  3D  space  using  multiple  focal  planes,  as  opposed  to 
stereoscopic  displays  that  simulate  depth  by  presenting  offset 
images to the left and right eye at a fixed focal plane (Blundell, 
2012).  Our  volumetric  display  with  time-multiplexed  multi-
focal planes can fast switch virtual images between far and near 
distance, creating a flicker-free appearance of the virtual objects 
rendered sequentially at different depths. This provides depth 
cues  such  as  not  only  binocular  disparity  but  also  accurate 
accommodation,  convergence  and  motion  parallax  without 
head or eye tracking. Since it projects computer graphics at the 
same focus distance of the target objects, drivers do not need to 
shift  focus  between  virtual  objects  on  the  display  and  real 
objects in the scene. Therefore, it helps reduce perceptual (e.g., 
dual images and defocus blur) and safety issues caused by focal 
depth mismatch (Kruijff, Swan, & Feiner, 2010; Tufano, 1997). 
We believe 8m focus depth is reasonable for collision warning 
because  we  need  to  warn  the  driver  in  advance  to  avoid 
collision.  For  example,  when  we  consider  the  generally 
accepted  2  second  rule,  the  driver  needs  to  be  warned  13m 
ahead of the threat at 15mph. For any hazard occurring within 
8m, a complementary auditory alarm could be more effective.  
We  used  a  wizard  of  Oz  method  to  simulate  pedestrian 
localization  technology  by  experimental  manipulation.  We 
assumed our capability of detecting and localizing pedestrians; 
e.g., via V2P communication (Honda, 2015). To simulate this, 
we pre-defined locations of pedestrians and a trigger point for 
pedestrians  to  emerge.  When  the  test  vehicle  passed  the  pre-
defined  trigger  point,  a  global  positioning  system  (GPS) 
triggered the visual warning to appear. This was accomplished 
by an excellent quality real time kinematic GPS: OxTS RT4003 

with  less  than  20  cm  localization  error.  This  event  also 
transmitted to the (acted) actual pedestrian by a walkie-talkie. 
We  sent  the  signal  to  the  pedestrian  about  a  half  second  in 
advance, considering the time delay of his reaction based on our 
pilot test and practice. 

In  the  traditional  warning,  a  “BRAKE”  sign  is  shown  to 
notify drivers of presence of pedestrians in the vehicle’s path 
(Figure  6.b).  It  was  based  on  head  up  warnings  currently 
available  in  some  luxury  cars.  Regardless  of  distance  to  the 
target,  the  sign  remains  the  same  at  the  center  of  the  display 
until  the  car  stops.  In  the  new  warning,  the  virtual  shadow  is 
shown  to  notify  drivers  of  direction  and  distance  of  an 
approaching pedestrian (Figure 6.c). 

Procedure 

Sixteen  experienced  drivers  were  asked  to  drive  a  test 
vehicle in a parking lot and brake for crossing pedestrians while 
using  different  interface  designs  for  pedestrian  collision 
warning.  We  designed  a  two  factor  repeated  measures 
experiment, such that participants completed the driving tasks 
under each of six conditions: 3 interface designs (no warning, 
traditional  warning  -  brake  sign,  and  new  warning  -  virtual 
shadow), and 2 levels of distance to the target pedestrians (near 
vs far). We introduced two different levels of distances to the 
target pedestrians that might affect the driver’s perceptual risk 
and yield different braking behaviors. The near targets appeared 
when the time to collision (TTC) was 2.5 sec. The 2.5 sec TTC 
was set to be short enough to induce last second hard braking 
and selected from referencing previous braking study literature 
(Fitch et al., 2010). We doubled the distance for the far targets 
to  encourage  timed-normal  braking.  First  participants  were 
asked  to  drive  without  any  warning  signs  for  both  distance 
conditions,  which  served  as  baseline.  Then  participants 
completed the rest of four experimental conditions. The order 
of  interface  design  experienced  was  counterbalanced  to 
minimize learning effects. We also randomized the location of 
road  events  and  randomly  added  no  event  trials  to  minimize 
drivers’  anticipation  of  pedestrian  presence.  During  each 
driving  trials,  we  time  stamped  location,  velocity,  and 
acceleration of the test vehicle for further analysis. 

In our user study, we gave participants a realistic parking lot 
scenario where they are asked to drive with constant speed of 
15  mph  until  they  arrived  at  the  pre-defined  parking  area 
designated for them. While driving they were asked to brake for 

 
 
 
 
 
Maximum  Deceleration.  Figure  8  (e)  and  (f)  summarizes  the 
post-hoc test results. For the near targets, both interface design 
reduced  maximum  deceleration.  For  the  far  targets,  the 
traditional warning showed even higher maximum deceleration 
than the baseline. 

Stopping Distance and Gap. For the far targets, both interface 
designs reduced stopping distance, which resulted in larger gaps 
leading  up  to  the  pedestrians.  The  interaction  plot  indicates 
drivers had similar stopping distances (i.e., traveled distances) 
regardless  of  target  distance  when  their  using  the  traditional 
warning. 

Discussion 

In  this  study,  we  investigated  the  effect  of  visual  warning 
presentation  methods  on  drivers’  performance  and  braking 
behavior  in  pedestrian  collision  avoidance.  Before  presenting 
any visual warning, we evaluated drivers’ baseline performance 
when  they  did  not  have  any  warnings.  We  intended  to  run  a 
pretest-posttest design where our main interest was behavioral 
changes  while  using  warning  systems  compared  to  drivers’ 
usual  (intact)  behavior.  Therefore,  we  did  post-hoc  contrast 
tests for the planned comparisons focusing on mean differences 
in both performance and behavior compared to the baseline. 

Regarding driver performance, both the traditional warning 
sign  and  the  virtual  shadow  reduced  stopping  distances  (or 
increased  gaps  from  the  pedestrian)  for  the  far  targets.  This 

any  crossing  pedestrians.  The  road  events  prompting  drivers’ 
reaction  were  always  actual  pedestrians.  In  visual  warning 
conditions, drivers additionally saw computer graphics on the 
HUD. 

Measures 

To  characterize  driver  braking  behavior  and  performance, 
we  analyzed  deceleration  profiles  during  each  braking 
maneuver and defined dependent variables (Figure 7) such as 
car  reaction  time  (Treact),  braking  time  (Tbrake),  time  to  stop 
(Tstop),  maximum  deceleration  (Gmax)  and  stopping  distance 
(Dstop).  We  defined  car  reaction  time  as  the  elapsed  time 
between  the  onset  of  a  stimulus  (when  the  car  passes  pre-
defined trigger line) and the beginning of the car’s deceleration. 
Braking  time  was  defined  as  time  spent  for  decelerating. 
Reaction and braking time add up to equal time to stop. Braking 
behavior was characterized by the process measures including 
reaction time, braking time, and maximum deceleration. Faster 
reaction  followed  by  longer  braking  time  along  with  smaller 
maximum deceleration was considered smoother timed braking 
behavior. Driver performance in pedestrian collision avoidance 
was  evaluated  by  the  final  outcome  of  vehicle  measure, 
stopping distance or gap from the target when the car stopped. 

Results 

We eliminated data from two participants who completely 
ignored the visual cues. Post-test interview revealed that they 
did not want to rely on technology, but rather believed in their 
own driving skill and experience. Therefore, we analyzed data 
from 14 participants using two-way repeated measure Analysis 
of Variance (ANOVA) to examine the effect of interface design 
and target distance. We found significant main and interaction 
effects on all five dependent variables, and performed post-hoc 
contrast  tests  for  the  planned  comparisons.  The  results  are 
summarized by mean and interaction plots (Figure 8). 

Reaction,  Braking  Time  and  Time  to  Stop.  Post-hoc  tests 
(Figure  8.  a  and  c)  revealed  that  the  virtual  shadow  reduced 
reaction time while increased braking time which resulted in the 
same  level  of  time  to  stop  compared  to  the  baseline  for  both 
near  and  far  targets.  The  traditional  warning  reduced  both 
reaction time and braking time, which resulted in reduced time 
to  stop.  More  interestingly,  as  shown  in  the  interaction  plot 
(Figure  8b),  target  distance  did  not  affect  reaction  time  when 
drivers used traditional warning. 

Figure 7. Dependent variables derived from deceleration profile 

Figure 8. Driver Braking Behavior and Performance. Mean and interaction plots 
of data from 14 participants. Mean values are reported with 95% confidence 
intervals. Group differences are reported with p-values from the contrast tests 
compared to the baseline (‘***’ p < 0.001, ‘**’ p < 0.01, ‘*’ p < 0.05.) TRD = 
Traditional warning, VS = Virtual Shadow, NO = No warning. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
result  suggests  that  visual  warnings,  whether  they  provide 
spatial information or not, improved driver’s performance. For 
the near target we did not find any improvement. 

Regarding braking behavior, both interface designs reduced 
reaction time implying that visual cues help with driver’s faster 
detection. Interestingly traditional warnings caused even harder 
braking for the far target, which is not necessarily required to 
avoid  collision.  Actually  drivers  showed  similar  braking 
behavior regardless of target distance in response to the warning 
signs.  This  is  probably  because  the  sign  lacks  spatial 
information about approaching pedestrians. On the contrary, the 
virtual shadow resulted in smoother braking for both near and 
far  targets.  This  result  suggests  that  spatial  information 
presented by conformal graphics resulted in smoother braking 
behavior.  The  trend  is  more  obvious  when  we  compare 
behavioral  changes  caused  by  target  distance  among  three 
interface designs. For example, the interaction plots in Figure 8 
(b) and (d) show the same differential effect of target distance 
between virtual shadow and no warning conditions where only 
stimuli for the driver were actual pedestrians. This implies that 
virtual  shadows  may  provide  the  same  level  of  depth  cues  as 
actual pedestrians. 

CONCLUSION 

This  work  demonstrates  the  opportunity  of  incorporating 
EID into interface design for automotive AR applications. We 
proposed  a  novel  interface,  the  virtual  shadow,  which  makes 
cross  traffic  dynamics  visible  through  an  AR  HUD.  The 
heuristic  evaluation  expected  virtual  shadow  to  benefit  driver 
performance  at  each  stage  of  cognitive  processing:  attention 
management, situation awareness, decision and workload. The 
empirical  usability  evaluation  demonstrated  that  pedestrian 
collision  warning  with  spatial 
information  provided  by 
conformal  graphics  on  the  HUD  can  result  in  not  only  better 
driver performance but also smoother braking behavior. 

This work also developed realistic driving scenarios and a 
test  protocol  for  usability  evaluation  of  pedestrian  collision 
warning  systems.  To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  this  work  is 
one  of  the  first  usability  evaluations  of  in-vehicle  head  up 
displays with 3D presentation capability. The proposed design 
and findings can be extended to other use-cases such as cross 
traffic  alerts  to  avoid  collision  with  vehicles  backing  up  in 
parking lots, given that high performance object detection and 
localization technology is available. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This submission was based on two studies led by the author 
who is the only student member. Special thanks goes to Dr. Joe 
Gabbard  (jgabbard@vt.edu)  for  all  of  his  insights,  time  and 
guidance  throughout  much  of  the  work;  research  design, 
analysis  and  writing.  The  first  study  was  conducted  in  Apr. 
2015 and will be presented at the 2016 HFES annual meeting. 
The author would like to thank to Jessica Isleib for her effort 
during the design walkthrough. The second study (conducted in 
May.  2015  –  Aug.  2015)  was  supported  by  Honda  Research 
Institute’s internship program and has been published (Kim et 
al.,  2016).  I  would  like  to  thank  Honda  Motor  Company  for 

providing the test vehicle, prototyping of the proposed design 
idea and recruiting participants for the experiment. 

REFERENCES 

Benenson, R., Omran, M., Hosang, J., & Schiele, B. (2014). Ten Years of 
Pedestrian Detection, What Have We Learned? arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1411.4304.  

Blundell, B. G. (2012). Volumetric 3D Displays Handbook of Visual Display 

Technology (pp. 1917-1931): Springer. 

Burns, C. M., & Hajdukiewicz, J. (2013). Ecological interface design: CRC 

Press. 

Fitch, G. M., Blanco, M., Morgan, J. F., Rice, J. C., Wharton, A., Wierwille, 

W. W., & Hanowski, R. J. (2010). Human Performance Evaluation 
of Light Vehicle Brake Assist Systems: Final Report. Retrieved 
from  

Gabbard, J. L., Fitch, G. M., & Kim, H. (2014). Behind the Glass: Driver 

Challenges and Opportunities for AR Automotive Applications. 
Proceedings of the IEEE, 102(2), 124-136.  
Gibson, J. J., & Crooks, L. E. (1938). A theoretical field-analysis of 

automobile-driving. The American journal of psychology, 51(3), 
453-471.  

Honda. (2015, December 15). Vehicle to pedestrian communication.   

Retrieved from http://world.honda.com/news/2014/4140904New-
Connected-Car-Automated-Driving-Technologies-ITS/print.html 

Kim, H., Miranda Anon, A., Misu, T., Li, N., Tawari, A., & Fujimura, K. 

(2016). Look at Me: Augmented Reality Pedestrian Warning 
System Using an In-Vehicle Volumetric Head Up Display. Paper 
presented at the Proceedings of the 21st International Conference 
on Intelligent User Interfaces. 

Kruijff, E., Swan, J. E., & Feiner, S. (2010, 13-16 Oct. 2010). Perceptual 

issues in augmented reality revisited. Paper presented at the Mixed 
and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), 2010 9th IEEE International 
Symposium on. 

Kruit, J. D., Amelink, M., Mulder, M., & van Paassen, M. M. (2005, 12-12 

Oct. 2005). Design of a Rally Driver Support System using 
Ecological Interface Design Principles. Paper presented at the 
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 2005 IEEE International 
Conference on. 

Lee, J., Hoffman, J., Stoner, H., Seppelt, B., & Brown, M. (2006). Application 

of ecological interface design to driver support systems. Paper 
presented at the Proceedings of IEA 2006: 16th World Congress on 
Ergonomics. 

NHTSA. (2014). Traffic safety facts 2012. Traffic Safety Facts FARS/GES 

Annual Report, I.  

Sears, A. (1997). Heuristic walkthroughs: Finding the problems without the 

noise. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 9(3), 
213-234.  

Seppelt, B. D., & Lee, J. D. (2007). Making adaptive cruise control (ACC) 

limits visible. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 
65(3), 192-205.  

Sharfi, T., & Shinar, D. (2014). Enhancement of road delineation can reduce 
safety. Journal of Safety Research, 49(0), 61.e61-68.  
Soro, A., Rakotonirainy, A., Schroeter, R., & Wollstdter, S. (2014). Using 
Augmented Video to Test In-Car User Experiences of Context 
Analog HUDs. Paper presented at the Adjunct Proceedings of the 
6th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and 
Interactive Vehicular Applications, Seattle, WA, USA.  

Tufano, D. R. (1997). Automotive HUDs: The overlooked safety issues. 

Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society, 39(2), 303-311.  

Vicente, K. J. (1999). Cognitive work analysis: Toward safe, productive, and 

healthy computer-based work: CRC Press. 

Wickens, C., & Hollands, J. (2000). Engineering Psychology and Human 

Performance: Pearson. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
