--- Page 1 ---
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we present an augmented forward 
collision warning system for Head-Up Display (HUD). The 
convergence of HUD and Augmented Reality (AR) needs 
challenge and make innovative application in automobile 
industry. We focus on an advance of Forward Collision Warning 
System (FCWS) by the fusion of HUD and AR. The proposed 
system detects the frontal vehicles and pedestrians, assesses the 
imminent danger caused by the detected results, and alerts the 
augmented warnings to support safe driving practices. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
HUD has been used in modern fighters to present 
information without requiring pilots to look away from their 
usual view. In the automobile industry, GM employed HUD 
first time in 1988 for Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme. HUD 
gains popularity since it can increase situation awareness and 
reduce driving workload by 0.2 seconds than Head-Down 
Display (HDD) [1]. However, most commercial HUD 
products display simple information such as vehicle speed and 
direction to the destination, which are conventionally 
displayed in the instrument cluster. In recent years, interesting 
research has focused on object detection [2]-[4] and AR based 
HUD [5]-[8] to increase the driver safety and convenience. 
Unlike existing HUD systems, the in-vehicle AR-HUD system 
displays information registered to the driver’s view [9]. 
Drivers should beware of vehicles, road hazard, lanes, 
pedestrians and traffic signs while controlling vehicle speed 
and directions. All these works increase physical and mental 
workload which is dangerous especially for elderly and people 
with slow recognition and responses. Therefore, an alarm that 
alerts the driver of a danger in the road can help to minimize 
driver workload and reduce vehicle accidents. Besides the 
navigational information, it should help driver’s hazard event 
detection if the safety information such as crossing pedestrians 
are detected from front view cameras and their positions are 
highlighted in the HUD according to the driver’s view point in 
the form of AR. 
In this paper, we present the augmented FCWS. The 
proposed system detects the vehicles and pedestrians using 
 
*Research supported the Industrial Strategic Technology Development 
Program of MOTIE [10040927, Development of Driver-View based 
In-vehicle AR Display System Technology]. 
Changrak Yoon is with Electronics and Telecommunications Research 
Institute, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-700 Republic of Korea (corresponding 
author to provide e-mail: cryoon@etri.re.kr).  
Kyongho Kim and Hye Sun Park are with Electronics and 
Telecommunications Research Institute, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-700 
Republic of Korea (e-mail: kkh@etri.re.kr, hspark78@etri.re.kr). 
Min Woo Park and Soon Ki Jung are with Kyungpook National 
University, Buk-gu, Daegu 702-701 Republic of Korea (e-mail: 
mwpark@vr.knu.ac.kr , skjung@knu.ac.kr). 
stereo cameras and displays early augmented warnings 
through an HUD (see-through display) to alert driver for 
taking a dodge or braking maneuver prior to collision. In the 
below, we describe the design and implementation issues with 
the real road test results. Then, future plans are described, 
followed by the conclusion. 
II. AUGMENTED FORWARD COLLISION WARNING SYSTEM 
A. Overview of Proposed System 
In the proposed system, stereo cameras are mounted on top 
of the experimental vehicle to capture the frontal images. The 
captured stereo images are used to detect vehicles and 
pedestrians. Once the detection is done, the threat is assessed 
by Time-To-Collision (TTC) calculation, and the visual 
properties for augmented warnings are decided according to 
the TTC. A speedometer is used to calculate the TTC by 
presenting the driving speed, and the feasibility study helps to 
make references of visual properties such as shape, color and 
so on. Projective transformation is performed to take the 
augmented warnings according to the driver’s view point 
obtained by an eye tracker. Geometric modeling between a 
camera and a HUD is carried out in a projective 
transformation. Finally, the augmented warnings are rendered 
onto an HUD. Fig.1 shows the overview of the proposed 
system. Fig. 2 shows the configuration of the proposed 
system. 
B. Vehicle and Pedestrian Detection 
The proposed system detects vehicles and pedestrians 
using equi-height mosaicking image to improve the execution 
time of the existing Graphic Processing Unit (GPU) 
accelerated approach  without decreasing the detection 
accuracy [10], [11]. 
 
Figure 1.  Overview of proposed system. 
Development of Augmented Forward Collision Warning System for 
Head-Up Display* 
Changrak Yoon, Kyongho Kim, Hye Sun Park, Min Woo Park, and Soon Ki Jung 
2014 IEEE 17th International Conference on
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC)
October 8-11, 2014. Qingdao, China
978-1-4799-6078-1/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE
2277

--- Page 2 ---
 
Equi-height mosaicking image 
generation
1D search based SVM 
classification using HOG feature
Tracking and nonmaximal 
suppression
Detected information
TTC calculation
Visual property configuration
Augmented warning setup
Speedometer
Augmented warning information
Projective transformation with 
reference eye position
Dynamic adjustment for 
driver＇s eye position
Augmented graphic rendering
Eye tracker
Video signal
Stereo camera
HUD
(See-through display)
Vehicle and pedestrian detection
Threat assessment and warning 
strategy conception
AR information registration and 
representation
 
Figure 2.  Configuration of proposed system. 
The equi-height mosaicking image is an image strip 
cropped on the basis of the height of a normal vehicle (or 
pedestrian) in the image and concatenated in a panorama-like 
manner. The proposed system calibrates to compensate for the 
lens distortion and correct the image skew caused by the 
yawing of the camera. After the calibration is finished, road 
scene is analyzed to detect the vanishing point and horizon. 
The detected vanishing point and horizon are used to compute 
the height of the vehicle and pedestrian on the road plane in 
the perspective image. Hypothesis position sampling using 
bird’s eye view is performed to extract the sampling position 
on the image at a uniform distance interval from the camera 
position. An equi-height image at each sampling position is 
generated and concatenated into an equi-height mosaicking 
image. The 1D search based the Support Vector Machine 
(SVM) classifier using the Histogram of Oriented Gradient 
(HOG) is trained and applied to detect vehicles and 
pedestrians. Tracking is performed by searching and matching 
only neighbor blocks of the detected position in the previous 
time. Finally, non-maximal suppression method is performed 
to group multiple overlapping candidates of vehicle and 
pedestrian. 
C. Threat assessment and warning strategy conception 
The proposed system takes the distance values of the 
detected vehicles and pedestrians by performing a stereo 
vision. The driving velocity is obtained by using a 
speedometer. Dividing the distance values of the detected 
vehicles and pedestrians by the driving velocity, the proposed 
system acquires the TTC values. The calculated TTC values 
present the degree of safety. The augmented warnings for the 
detected vehicles and pedestrians depend on the calculated 
TTC values. The three threat level is decided by the calculated 
TTC values. According to the TCC values, the detected 
vehicles and pedestrians with high TCC values are used to 
represent the augmented warnings. 
It is important to provide necessary information to the 
driver through an intuitive and helpful representation. To 
improve the driving safety and minimize the driving workload, 
the augmented warnings should be represented in such a way 
that it is more easily understood. It is therefore necessary to 
configure the characteristics of the augmented warnings, and 
find a way to represent the augmented warnings according to 
these characteristics. In addition, the proposed system needs 
to be conducted into both the amount of information that can 
minimize a driver’s cognitive load and the types of 
representation that can minimize the driver’s visual load. The 
result of a feasibility study using driving simulator [12] is used 
to configure the visual properties for representation of the 
augmented warnings. Visual properties include the visual 
information of the threat level, shape, color, transparency, 
relative position and size, icon, text, and so on. 
D. AR Information Registration and representation 
After the vehicles and pedestrians in imminent danger are 
distinguished by the threat assessment, the registration in 
HUD in the geometric perspective is performed to alerts the 
augmented warning according to the driver’s view point. The 
vehicle coordinate system needs to be defined arbitrary. In the 
proposed system, the origin of the system is set in the back of 
the vehicle with the x-axis to the front. The y-axis is to the left 
direction and z-axis completes the right-handed coordinate 
system. Therefore, the system is constant regardless of 
vehicle’s movement and attitude change. The other coordinate 
systems for the stereo cameras, eye tracker and HUD can be 
defined similarly. An approximation method with minimum 
complexity is used to overlay the augmented warnings on the 
real world. Geometric modeling between the 2D image of a 
camera and a 2D HUD is carried out in a projective 
transformation (2D homography) with a fixed driver’s eye 
position. Because the projective transformation parameter is 
calculated in the fixed position and view, dynamic adjustment 
is performed to compensate the movements in the driver’s eye 
position. Eye tracker is also used to recognize the driver’s eye 
position in real time. 
III. EXPERIMENTS 
In the proposed system, the stereo cameras are mounted on 
the top and the transparent display is installed in front of the 
passenger seat. The stereo cameras are 8 mm cameras with a 
resolution of 640 × 480 at a speed of 30 fps and the transparent 
display is a 22-inch transparent Samsung LCD display with a 
transparency of 15% instead of an existing automotive HUD 
product. Before the road test, we create the projective 
2278

--- Page 3 ---
 
TABLE I.  
VEHICLE AND PEDESTRIAN DETECTION RESULTS 
Object Type 
Experimental Results of Vehicle and Pedestrian Detection 
Approach 
Detection Time 
Precision 
Recall 
F1 measure 
Vehicle (Highway) 
opencv-gpusvm 
472 ms 
82.14 % 
80.20 % 
81.16 % 
proposed method 
47 ms 
88.34 % 
85.21 % 
86.75 % 
Vehicle (Downtown) 
opencv-gpusvm 
497 ms 
78.92 % 
78.23 % 
78.57 % 
proposed method 
58 ms 
86.25 % 
83.67 % 
84.95 % 
Pedestrian (Downtown) 
opencv-gpusvm 
348 ms 
77.48 % 
72.26 % 
74.28 % 
proposed method 
83 ms 
88.17 % 
80.52 % 
84.17 % 
transformation parameters using the conjugate point 
acquisition. Current implementation let the user select 
detection target, e.g. vehicle or pedestrian, for real time 
processing. The visual properties can be modified to test 
various visual effects. 
For training the SVM classifiers, we use a training data set 
that contained positive images of 1,067 vehicles, negative 
images of 38,253 non-vehicles, positive images of 7,248 
pedestrians and negative images of 27,135 non-pedestrians. 
The accuracy is measured with an F1 measure. We compare 
the performance of the proposed system to the existing 
GPU-based OpenCV HOG detector and HOG-based SVM 
detector. Table 1 shows the experimental results. 
Fig. 3 shows the images of the vehicles and pedestrians 
detected through the proposed system on the transparent 
display. The augmented warnings for the vehicles and 
pedestrians can be selectively highlighted in some situations 
for safe driving. Some of them should be helpful for people 
with slow recognition and responses like elderly. 
The proposed system is displayed with delay when the 
detected object passes quickly. We can experience similar 
behaviors when the experimental vehicle turns quickly. 
Therefore, it needs to improve the performance and the speed, 
which responds to robustly about various and fast speed in 
various vehicle environments. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
We are in the first phase of research and development for 
the proposed system with the five year plans (2012-2016). 
Ending the second research year, an experimental application 
has been designed and tested. From the road tests, we can 
observe the potential of the augmented FCWS and derive 
further improvement issues. Future plan is derived as below. 
The transparent display will be replaced by a projector 
HUD because the transparent display creates double vision 
(diplopia) causing frequent eye accommodation leading to eye 
strain. This replacement will require a conversion model 
between images and the curvy windshield for AR display such 
as the rational function model. The proposed system relies on 
a GPU accelerated computer which is not familiar with 
automotive industry. Therefore, it will be necessary to 
implement the proposed system in real time embedded 
systems using in automotive industry. The augmented 
warnings should be displayed based on the situation 
awareness. Since the augmented warnings often obstructs 
driver's field of vision of the road, the minimized and selected 
information will have to be displayed intelligently. 
 
Figure 3.  Augmented warning results for (a) vehicles and (b) pedestrians. 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. J. Horrey, C.D. Wickens and A.L. Alexander, “The Effects of 
Head-Up Display Clutter and In-Vehicle Display Separation on 
Concurrent Driving Performance,” Proc. the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 2003, p. 1880. 
[2] N. Dalal and B. Triggs, “Histograms of oriented gradients for human 
detection,” IEEE Conf.Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, vol. 
1, 2005, pp. 886–893. 
[3] R. Benenson et al., “Pedestrian detection at 100 frames per second,” 
IEEE Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2012, pp. 
2903–2910. 
[4] D. F. Llorca et al., “Vehicle logo recognition in traffic images using 
HOG features and SVM,” IEEE Conf. Intelligent Transportation 
Systems, 2013, pp. 2229–2234. 
[5] V. Charissis and S. Papanastasiou, “Human-Machine Collaboration 
through Vehicle Head Up Display Interface,” Int. J. Cognition, 
Technol., Work, vol. 12, no. 1, 2010, pp. 41–50. 
[6] Y.C. Shinko, D. Anup, and M.T. Mohan, “Active Heads-up Display 
Based Speed Compliance Aid for Driver Assistance: A Novel Interface 
and Comparative Experimental Studies,” IEEE Int. Symp. IV, 2007, pp. 
594–599. 
[7] A. Sato et al., “Visual Navigation System on Windshield Head-Up 
Display,” Proc. 13th World Congress ITS, 2006, pp. 167–175. 
[8] H. Watanabe et al., “The Effect of HUD Warning Location on Driver 
Responses,” Proc. 6th World Congress ITS, 1999, pp. 1–10. 
[9] H. S. Park, M. W. Park, K. H. Won, K. H. Kim and S. K. Jung, 
“In-Vehicle AR-HUD System to Provide Driving-Safety Information,” 
ETRI J., vol. 35, no. 6, 2013, pp. 1038–1047. 
[10] M. W. Park, J. P. Park and S. K. Jung, “Real-time Vehicle Detection 
using Equi-Height Mosaicking Image,” Int. Conf. ACM Reliable and 
Convergent Systems, 2013, pp. 171–176. 
[11] M. W. Park and S. K. Jung, “GPU-Based Real-Time Pedestrian 
Detection and Tracking Using Equi-Height Mosaicking Image,” Int. 
Conf. Neural Information Processing, part-3, 2013, pp. 409–416. 
[12] H. S. Park and K. H. Kim, “Efficient Information Representation 
Method for Driver-centered AR-HUD system,” HCI Int., part-3, 2013, 
pp. 393–400. 
2279
