--- Page 1 ---
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hihc20
International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/hihc20
Evaluating the Effectiveness of Contact-Analog and
Bounding Box Prototypes in Augmented Reality
Head-Up Display Warning for Chinese Novice
Drivers Under Various Collision Types and Traffic
Density
Wanting Chen, Liuqiucheng Niu, Shan Liu, Shu Ma, Hongting Li & Zhen Yang
To cite this article: Wanting Chen, Liuqiucheng Niu, Shan Liu, Shu Ma, Hongting Li & Zhen Yang
(18 Mar 2024): Evaluating the Effectiveness of Contact-Analog and Bounding Box Prototypes
in Augmented Reality Head-Up Display Warning for Chinese Novice Drivers Under Various
Collision Types and Traffic Density, International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, DOI:
10.1080/10447318.2024.2327197
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2024.2327197
Published online: 18 Mar 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 46
View related articles 
View Crossmark data

--- Page 2 ---
Evaluating the Effectiveness of Contact-Analog and Bounding Box Prototypes in 
Augmented Reality Head-Up Display Warning for Chinese Novice Drivers Under 
Various Collision Types and Traffic Density
Wanting Chena, Liuqiucheng Niua, Shan Liua, Shu Maa, Hongting Lib, and Zhen Yanga 
aDepartment of Psychology, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, China; bInstitute of Applied Psychology, College of Education, Zhejiang 
University of Technology, Hangzhou, China 
ABSTRACT 
Augmented Reality Head-Up Display (AR-HUD) is a promising solution to the current warning sys­
tem distraction problem. However, how to effectively convey warnings through AR graphics is still 
unclear. This study examines the effectiveness of the contact-analog graphic compared to the 
bounding box graphic in various collision types and traffic densities. Forty-eight participants 
watched AR-augmented driving videos and were instructed to respond to critical events. Reaction 
time, response rate, and subjective evaluations were compared for rear-end and pedestrian colli­
sions in different traffic densities under different warnings. Both bounding box and contact-analog 
warnings improved driving performance compared to the non-warning group. The contact-analog 
warning performed better for rear-end collisions, while the bounding box warning had a lower 
reaction time for pedestrian collisions, regardless of traffic density.
KEYWORDS 
AR-HUD; bounding box 
warnings; contact-analog 
warnings; world-fixed 
graphics; conformal 
graphics; collision type; 
traffic density   
1. Introduction
Driving is a complex task (Ma et al., 2021) that requires 
drivers to process a large amount of visual information 
under time pressure (Rusch et al., 2013). However, drivers 
can only process a small percentage of visual information at 
once (Eyraud et al., 2015; Ng-Thow-Hing et al., 2013; Rusch 
et al., 2013; Smith et al., 2021; Ward & Helton, 2022), which 
can lead to serious road traffic collisions. To address this 
issue, advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS) have been 
developed to signal hazards (Brijs et al., 2022). However, 
many of these systems lack spatial information (Kim et al., 
2016; Kim & Gabbard, 2019) and cannot direct drivers’ 
attention to the precise location of the hazard (Kim et al., 
2016). Recent research suggests that these hazard warnings 
may encourage “blind” reactions (Merenda et al., 2018). To 
overcome this problem, augmented reality-based head-up 
displays (AR-HUDs) are becoming a promising solution 
(Tonnis & Klinker, 2006).
Augmented reality (AR) is an interface metaphor that 
allows for overlaying visual objects onto the physical world, 
in the form of graphical augmentation (Grubert et al., 2017; 
Kim & Hwang, 2016; Langlois & Soualmi, 2016; Ma et al., 
2021; Ward & Helton, 2022), enabling users to interact with 
physical and virtual objects simultaneously (Grubert et al., 
2017; Kim et al., 2018). In-car AR applications can provide 
visual information about driving while keeping drivers’ eyes 
on the road (Calvi et al., 2020; Gabbard et al., 2014; Ng- 
Thow-Hing et al., 2013; Tonnis & Klinker, 2006). AR-HUDs 
offer the benefit of providing spatiotemporal information on 
imminent hazards (Gabbard et al., 2014; Ng-Thow-Hing 
et al., 2013; Schwarz & Fastenmeier, 2018). Previous studies 
have shown that AR-HUDs effectively signal hazards (Kim 
& Hwang, 2016), reduce drivers’ inattentional blindness 
(Wang et al., 2021), improve intuitive cognition, and 
decrease driver distraction (Park et al., 2016).
The design of graphical elements in AR-HUDs greatly 
affects their effectiveness in delivering warnings (Jing et al., 
2022; Kim & Gabbard, 2019). The saliency of the AR 
graphic impacts attention and driving behavior (Chen et al., 
2023; Eyraud et al., 2015; Jing et al., 2022). Poor design can 
lead 
to 
suboptimal 
performance 
and 
reduced 
trust 
(Ariansyah et al., 2022; Ng-Thow-Hing et al., 2013). It is 
crucial to find a balance in designing AR graphics that cap­
ture attention without overwhelming or distracting drivers 
(Eyraud et al., 2015; Park et al., 2016). Thorough investiga­
tions are necessary to understand the complexities of AR 
graphics before the widespread implementation of AR- 
HUDs in vehicles (Faria et al., 2020).
1.1. Conceptual designs of AR interfaces
Two conceptual designs of AR graphics exist in the context 
of AR technology: screen- fixed graphics, which are fixed to 
specific areas within the windshield, and world-fixed graph­
ics (or conformal graphics), which are directly superimposed 
on real-world objects to blend seamlessly (Gabbard et al., 
2014; Kim et al., 2016, 2018; Riegler et al., 2021; Smith 
et al., 2021). Typically, the screen-fixed graphic can be used 
CONTACT Zhen Yang 
yangzhen@zstu.edu.cn 
Department of Psychology, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Qiantang District, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China 
ß 2024 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2024.2327197

--- Page 3 ---
to display important driving information that is not directly 
related to real objects, such as vehicle speed, fuel level, and 
engine temperature, while the world-fixed graphics are suit­
able for presenting information regarding navigation and 
imminent hazard warnings (Gabbard et al., 2014) as they 
provide a natural way to convey spatiotemporal information 
aligned with the moving objects (Ng-Thow-Hing et al., 
2013).
There are some AR interface studies focusing on world- 
fixed graphics (conformal graphics). In general, two major 
prototypes are involved in the study of world-fixed graphics: 
namely, virtual shadows (Jing et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2016, 
2018) and contact-analog graphics (Faria et al., 2020; 
Medenica et al., 2011; Schewe & Vollrath, 2021; Smith et al., 
2021) (see Figure 1). Virtual shadow is a dome-shaped con­
formal virtual object, which is commonly used in the field 
of warning (Kim et al., 2018). Jing et al. (2022) investigated 
the effect of visual shadows on autonomous vehicle takeover 
efficiency and drivers’ eye movement characteristics. The 
result demonstrated that the virtual shadow AR-HUD inter­
face could effectively reduce the driver’s visual distraction, 
and improve the efficiency of obtaining visual information. 
Kim et al. (2016) also used a visual shadow to augment the 
crossing pedestrian and the evaluation result showed that 
the visual shadow warning was outperformed in all aspects. 
Meanwhile, contact-analog graphics, encompassing the vis­
ual images within the same general field of view as the crit­
ical objects (Wickens & Long, 1994), are commonly used as 
navigation cues. For example, Medenica et al. (2011) 
assessed the effectiveness of AR, street view, and traditional 
maps on personal navigation devices (PNDs). In the case of 
the AR PND, they used a contact-analog graphic overlaid on 
the route to provide directional indications. The results 
revealed that the contact-analog graphic had a positive 
impact on driving. Additionally, Faria et al. (2020) employed 
the contact-analog graphic to enhance navigation landmarks 
and assessed drivers’ glance behavior. The experiment result 
revealed that the contact-analog graphic condition was 
linked to prolonged glances. However, the aforementioned 
studies on the contact- analog graphic focused on naviga­
tion, and a dearth of research exists regarding the contact- 
analog graphic in hazard warnings.
Previous studies suggested that the potential of AR- 
HUDs to enhance attention toward cued elements while 
minimizing the impact on attentional resources could be 
attributed to the conformal nature of the AR graphic (Kim 
& Gabbard, 2019; Rusch et al., 2013). We hypothesize that 
contact-analog graphics, similar to visual shadows, have the 
potential to serve as effective warnings due to their con­
formal characteristics. According to the proximity compati­
bility interface-design principle, it is recommended that 
driving task-related elements be processed simultaneously 
(Peereboom et al., 2023). Visual shadows are commonly 
used to integrate hazards and warnings for the purpose of 
alerting drivers. However, in complex traffic scenarios, visual 
shadow warnings may inadvertently include other irrelevant 
objects, thereby requiring drivers to spend extra time to 
identify the critical hazards. In contrast, contact- analog 
graphics offer the advantage of connecting the visual warn­
ing with the critical object by overlaying color on it without 
covering other objects. Furthermore, the contact-analog 
graphics, serving as analogs to the corresponding elements 
in the distant domain (Chen et al., 2023; Naish, 1964; Rusch 
et al., 2013), can clearly indicate the type of hazard, even 
when the hazard is occluded by other objects. However, it is 
also important to note that the contact-analog graphic com­
pletely covers the entire object, which might induce visual 
illusions due to color-induced masking and overlapping 
(Schewe & Vollrath, 2021). An excessive presence of color 
in contact-analog graphics is likely to occlude real-world 
Figure 1. Examples of visual shadow graphics and traditional contact-analog graphics. Note: (a) Example of the virtual shadow in action. The virtual shadows move 
with the movement of the pedestrian. (b) Examples of contact-analog displaying concepts that were used in navigation. Guidance advice: the graphic overlaid on 
the route to provide directional indications. Road sign visualization: the graphic overlaid on road signs to augment sign information.
2
W. CHEN ET AL.

--- Page 4 ---
information (Merenda et al., 2018). Therefore, it remains to 
be explored whether contact-analog graphics can be equally 
applicable to the field of warnings.
Currently, the prevailing approach for delivering warn­
ings in AR-HUDs is through the use of bounding boxes to 
highlight potential hazards. The bounding box is a technol­
ogy-driven interface design since it is a common way for 
machine-vision algorithms to convey discovered dangers 
(Kim & Gabbard, 2019). It could provide accurate location 
clues of objects due to their salient geometric characteristic 
and not occlude the object. Previous studies on AR warnings 
have predominantly employed bounding boxes to augment 
representations of pedestrians or vehicles (e.g., Chen et al., 
2023; Kim & Gabbard, 2019; Wang et al., 2021; Wu et al., 
2022). However, it is worth noting that the bounding box 
may compromise the ability to predict hazard movements 
and distract drivers from other critical environmental ele­
ments as they may induce attention narrowing (Kim et al., 
2016; Kim & Gabbard, 2019). Besides, the bounding box 
warning can inevitably encompass unrelated objects and 
may compromise the warning effect.
Additionally, there may be subtle differences in the 
depth of processing required for the two AR warnings. 
Previous studies have shown that information processing 
is affected by variations in graphic shape. For example, 
processing complex graphics requires more time and cog­
nitive effort than processing simple shapes (Dai et al., 
2021). As a result, one of the key distinctions between 
contact-analog warnings and bounding box warnings is 
that contact-analog warnings outline the contour of the 
impending hazard and include more complex shape pre­
sentations. This might necessitate the driver to allocate 
extra time to identify and connect the type of hazard rep­
resented by the contour. Limited research has investigated 
the effects of graphics in the context of differences in the 
level of perceptual processing of graphics. The potential 
impact of this processing difference justifies further 
exploration. Therefore, it is necessary to directly compare 
the effectiveness of the contact-analog and bounding box 
prototypes in warning scenarios.
1.2. Environment factors and AR graphics
AR-HUD warnings can be applied to two primary driving 
collision scenarios: rear-end collisions and pedestrian colli­
sions. The rear-end collision is one of the most frequent 
types of crashes (Muhrer & Vollrath, 2011; Yue et al., 2021). 
It accounted for 29% of all crashes in the United States (Yue 
et al., 2021). Furthermore, vulnerable road users, such as 
pedestrians, are more likely to be involved in crashes and 
experience more severe consequences (Schubert et al., 2023; 
Zhu et al., 2023). Several previous studies have examined 
the impact of AR warnings in various scenarios, including 
pedestrian crossings (e.g., Calvi et al., 2020; Rusch et al., 
2013), crossing vehicles (e.g., Schwarz & Fastenmeier, 2018), 
emergency U-turns by the vehicle in front, and leading 
vehicles braking (e.g., Jing et al., 2022). However, it is 
important to note that these studies often did not analyze 
the effects of AR warnings in these specific scenarios in 
depth, nor did they consider the potential influence of scen­
ario characteristics on the effectiveness of the AR graphic 
warning.
Moreover, it is crucial to consider various traffic-density 
conditions when designing AR-HUD warning interfaces. 
Previous research indicates that increasing the number of 
items in the central vision results in extended reaction times 
and reduced accuracy in detection tasks (Lee et al., 2023). 
This implies that a complex environment can induce visual 
clutter, thereby impacting object detection (Li et al., 2019; 
Rosenholtz et al., 2007). In driving scenarios characterized 
by high traffic density, which can be perceived as a form of 
dynamic “situational clutter” (Edquist & Johnston, 2008; 
Trick et al., 2010), selective attention may be compromised 
(Edquist & Johnston, 2008), rendering it more challenging 
to perceive hazards and warnings (Trick et al., 2010). We 
hypothesize that specific AR warning graphics may be suffi­
ciently noticeable in low- traffic-density conditions but may 
exhibit reduced effectiveness in high-traffic-density condi­
tions. Additionally, the attention-grabbing nature of AR 
graphics (Chen et al., 2023; Kim & Gabbard, 2019) could 
contribute to additional visual clutter, especially caused by 
object occlusion (Beck et al., 2010). The question of whether 
providing additional AR warnings in high-traffic-density 
conditions would enhance hazard detection or exacerbate 
visual clutter remains unresolved. It is imperative to conduct 
further investigation into these graphical effects across vary­
ing traffic-density conditions.
Consequently, this study aims to investigate the effects of 
AR warnings on rear- end collisions and pedestrian colli­
sions under varying traffic densities, to further examine their 
applicability in diverse driving scenarios.
1.3. The objective of the study
Despite the potential of contact-analog graphics in hazard 
warning, there is a lack of extensive research on their effect­
iveness in this context, and few studies have directly com­
pared them to bounding box graphics. Furthermore, few 
research has systematically explored the potential impact of 
differences in cognitive processing levels on the effectiveness 
of warnings for the two types of graphics. Therefore, the 
objective of this study was to examine the strengths and lim­
itations of these two prototypes of AR warnings, specifically 
considering collision type and traffic density as factors 
within driving scenarios.
This study also focuses on the effects of AR warnings on 
novice drivers, who are generally more prone to collisions 
(Pitt et al., 2021). Previous research suggests that novice 
drivers tend to devote excessive attention to vehicle handling 
routines, resulting in error-prone search patterns (Twisk, 
1995). Consequently, they may struggle to identify road haz­
ards in complex driving environments. AR technology offers 
a promising solution by providing visual cues that guide the 
attention of novice drivers toward the most critical hazards 
(Rane et al., 2016). However, it is important to consider that 
novice drivers lack experience, which may potentially affect 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
3

--- Page 5 ---
their perception of visual warning graphics (Zhao et al., 
2023). Thus, there is a need to investigate which AR heads- 
up display (HUD) interfaces can effectively enhance the risk 
perception of novice drivers.
Furthermore, previous experiments have mainly been 
conducted using driving simulators without a genuine AR- 
HUD device, either relying on flat projections to display vid­
eos (e.g., Eyraud et al., 2015; Hwang et al., 2016; Hwang & 
Kim, 2016; Kim & Gabbard, 2019; Ng-Thow-Hing et al., 
2013) or using virtual reality (VR) (e.g., Abdi et al., 2017; 
Ma et al., 2021; Merenda et al., 2019). It should be noted 
that, when using a genuine AR-HUD device, the AR graphic 
is projected directly onto the windshield, causing our eyes to 
converge on points beyond the windshield, which can result 
in a distracting double image of the AR graphic (Ng-Thow- 
Hing et al., 2013). Therefore, the varying distances between 
the AR graphic and the real object can cause a conflict 
between vergence and accommodation, impacting depth per­
ception (Adams et al., 2022; Gabbard et al., 2014; Navarro 
et al., 2017; Ng-Thow-Hing et al., 2013; Werneke & 
Vollrath, 2013; Winkler et al., 2016). Merely relying on flat 
projection or VR could introduce a confounding factor in 
assessing the influence of the AR graphic.
Above all, the main objective of this study is to assess the 
advantages and drawbacks of various AR warnings for nov­
ice drivers in a genuine AR-HUD context across different 
driving scenarios.
2. Methods
2.1. Participants
Due to limitations in Gpower’s capability to handle a 
three-factor mixed design, a priori power analysis was per­
formed using MorePower 6 (Campbell & Thompson, 2012) 
with a significance level of 0.05, power of 0.8, and effect size 
of 0.2. The results indicated that the total sample size should 
exceed 42 to achieve the desired power. The study recruited 
a convenience sample of 48 gender-balanced participants 
from Zhejiang Sci-Tech University in Hangzhou, China. 
Participants ages ranged from 19 to 26 years, with a mean 
age of 22 years (M ¼ 22, SD ¼ 2.0). Additionally, all partici­
pants held a valid Chinese driver’s license, with an average 
driving experience of 1526 km and 2.7 years. The study 
focused on novice drivers, and none of the participants had 
any prior experience with the AR-HUD. All participants con­
firmed having a normal or corrected- to-normal vision, pro­
vided written informed consent in accordance with the 
approved research protocol of the Institutional Review Board 
at the Department of Psychology, Zhejiang Sci-Tech 
University, and received compensation for their participation.
2.2. Experimental design
A three-factor mixed design was employed to investigate the 
impact of AR warnings on driving performance and usabil­
ity. The design included AR warning type (bounding box 
warnings vs. contact-analog warnings vs. non-warning) as a 
between-subject variable, traffic density (high traffic density 
vs. low traffic density), and collision types (rear-end collision 
vs. pedestrian collision) as within-subject variables.
We adopted the definition of traffic density provided by 
Trick et al. (2010), where high traffic density was defined as 
one vehicle per 150 m, and low traffic density was defined as 
one vehicle per 1500 m.
Dependent 
variables 
for 
comprehensive 
assessment 
included behavior performance indicators, such as reaction 
time and response rate. Additionally, to evaluate user experi­
ence related to the two tested AR graphics, participants 
completed the User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) 
(Laugwitz et al., 2008) after the experiment.
2.3. Experimental equipment
The experimental equipment setup closely resembles the one 
used in the study by Hwang et al. (2016). The experiment 
involved several equipment components: a 180- inch screen, 
a beam projector (CB-935W, Epson, JPN) with 3700 lumi­
nance, a keyboard, a computer synchronizer, and two com­
puters. One computer was used for collecting driver 
response data, while the other computer projected the back­
ground image. In the optical see-through augmented reality 
display 
condition, 
the 
AR-HUD 
device 
(DGG01, 
Zhangjiagang Qidian Photoelectric Technology Co., Ltd., 
CN) was used to play the videos. The AR-HUD is developed 
with dual free-form reflective optics. Its corresponding 
Digital Micromirror Device (DMD) resolution is 864  480, 
the brightness is 12,000 nit, and the refresh rate is 60 Hz. 
Presenting the physical background at a closer distance 
beyond AR virtual images can induce the convergence adap­
tation conflict (Huang & Menozzi, 2022). We placed an 
LED screen projecting a picture of mountains at a vertical 
distance of 3 m from the viewers to imitate the conver­
gence adaptation conflict in AR application. The experiment 
scenarios were built using a driving simulator, which 
included driving simulator software (STISIMDRIVE M100K, 
Systems Technology, Inc., Hawthorne, CA, USA), and an 
operating system (Logitech MOMO, Newark, CA, USA). 
The experimental setup is illustrated in Figure 2.
2.4. Materials
Due to technical limitations, it was not possible to directly 
augment target objects in the driving simulator. Therefore, 
driving videos generated by a medium-fidelity driving simu­
lator were used in the study.
The experiment consisted of two types of traffic condi­
tions: high traffic density and low traffic density. There was 
a total of 24 videos, with each experimental video having a 
playback time of 1.5 min. Both traffic conditions consisted 
of the same types of latent threats, such as rear-end colli­
sions with preceding vehicles and collisions with pedestrians. 
Previous research indicated that drivers had longer reaction 
times to pedestrians appearing on the left side compared to 
the right side (Powelleit & Vollrath, 2019). The direction of 
4
W. CHEN ET AL.

--- Page 6 ---
pedestrian crossings was balanced, and the order of left and 
right crossings was randomized to reduce potential bias.
Furthermore, color can significantly contribute to the 
perceived meaning and visibility of graphics (Kim et al., 
2016) and previous research demonstrated that color influ­
ences hazard perception (Ng & Chan, 2018). Utilizing 
appropriate color coding could enhance performance (Ng & 
Chan, 2018). In traditional user interface design (UID), cau­
tion indications are typically represented in yellow, while 
warning indications are represented in red (Friedrich & 
Vollrath, 2022). However, the presentation of red and yellow 
is affected by hue shifts in AR projections. For example, 
some argued that the color yellow is more prominent in AR 
(Merenda et al., 2016), while the color red is less prominent 
in AR (Gabbard et al., 2005). Therefore, to avoid the inter­
ference of hue shift in AR, each participant was shown red 
and yellow versions of the AR warning. Both colors were in 
RGB space. Red was [255, 0, 0], and yellow was [255, 
255, 0].
The experiment divided the 24 videos into four blocks 
based on the combination of traffic density and warning 
color: high traffic density with a red warning, high traffic 
density with a yellow warning, low traffic density with a red 
warning, and low traffic density with a yellow warning. Each 
video served as a trial, with six trials in each block. The pres­
entation order of the four blocks was counterbalanced using 
Latin squares. Since the videos were prerecorded, participants 
were unable to control the vehicle. To closely simulate real 
driving conditions, the videos were interspersed with other 
unpredictable events, such as speeding, cutoff vehicles, and 
red-light violations. Each group of videos included 15 events, 
including two pedestrian collisions, one rear-end collision, 
cutoff vehicles, speeding, and red-light violations.
Two types of AR warnings were employed, namely, the 
bounding box warning and the contact-analog warning, to 
alert drivers about unforeseen events. The contact- analog 
warning used in this study was integrated into the virtual 
environment, where its shape dynamically changed in 
response to the movement of the augmented object (Smith 
et al., 2021), whereas the shape of the bounding box warning 
remained unchanged. Providing a warning with a duration 
of 3.0–4.0 s before a possible collision may be appropriate 
(Dr€uke et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2015) and 
may significantly reduce driving speed (Hajiseyedjavadi et al., 
2018). In this experiment, a pre-recorded video was utilized, 
maintaining a constant speed of 54 km/h for the ego-vehicle. 
Taking into account the driving speed in the video, we pre- 
determined the parameters (such as distance and speed) of 
the leading vehicle and pedestrian in each scenario. This 
ensured that the AR warning, lasting for 3.0 s, could be pre­
sented until the collision occurred in the various collision 
scenarios. Figures 3 and 4 depict AR warnings in augmented 
conditions.
2.5. Procedure and tasks
Informed consent was obtained from the participants before 
their first visit. Subsequently, participants completed a 
demographics questionnaire. They were then comfortably 
seated in front of the AR-HUD. Participants were instructed 
to look through the device and direct their gaze toward the 
virtual panel in front of them. The experimenter familiarized 
the participants with the AR warning.
The participants were divided into three groups for the 
experiment: a contact- analog warning group, a bounding 
box warning group, and a control group without any warn­
ings serving as the baseline. All participants in the three 
groups had the same physical settings except that the pres­
entation of the warning differed. Although we did not pro­
vide the control group with the AR warning, the 
participants in this group still watched the video through 
the AR-HUD to avoid possible interference caused by the 
difference in physical settings.
Participants were instructed to imagine themselves as the 
driver while watching the video. In the videos, the ego 
vehicle is traveling on the road at a constant speed of 
54 km/h. In each group of videos, the vehicle passes through 
road sections, such as intersections, curves, uphill grades, 
and straight roads. We added these road sections to increase 
the realism of the scene as much as possible. During the 
experiment, we asked the participant to press a button 
promptly upon observing unpredictable events, including 
Figure 2. Demonstration graphs for experiment laboratory.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
5

--- Page 7 ---
vehicle speeding, vehicle running a red light, vehicle lane 
changing, preceding vehicle braking (rear-end collisions), and 
a pedestrian crossing the road in front of the ego vehicle 
(pedestrian collisions). Participants were required to respond 
to all events to prevent anticipation of pedestrian crossings 
and vehicle braking (Wang et al., 2021). Additionally, the first 
three events were designed to enhance participants’ focus on 
the experiment. Upon completion of all blocks, participants 
filled out a User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ). Figure 5
illustrates the detailed procedure.
3. Results
The experimental data were analyzed using IBM SPSS 
Statistics 26. A significance level of 0.05 was used for all 
statistical analyses. Generalized estimating equations (GEE), 
based on the work of Nelder and Wedderburn (1972) on 
generalized linear models, were used for the statistical analy­
ses. GEE is a versatile statistical approach used for analyzing 
longitudinal and clustered data by fitting a marginal model. 
Given the repeated measures nature of this experiment data, 
Figure 3. The bounding box warning examined in the driving simulator study. Note: We divided the videos into four groups based on traffic density and warning 
colors. The videos in group (A) have a high traffic density, with the red warning. The videos in group (B) have a high traffic density, with the yellow waning. The vid­
eos in group (C) have a low traffic density, with the red warning. The videos in group (D) have a low traffic density, with the yellow warning. Each group of videos 
includes three types of critical events: (a) rear-end collision, (b) right-side pedestrian collision, and (c) left-side pedestrian collision, and left and right-side pedestrian 
collisions occur equally.
Figure 4. The contact-analog warning examined in the driving simulator study. Note: The videos were categorized as Figure 2.
6
W. CHEN ET AL.

--- Page 8 ---
there may be a correlation between the data. Liang and 
Zeger (1986) in their study suggested with repeated observa­
tions, the correlation among values for a given participant 
must be taken into account, and the estimating equation 
might be suitable to analyze the data. In addition, GEE is 
well-suited for situations involving missing data and small 
sample sizes. Due to participants not responding to certain 
unpredictable events, the behavioral performance data col­
lected in this study contained missing values. GEE was 
employed to account for these missing data points. Last but 
not least, we examined the distribution of the reaction time 
and the response rate and found that the data in this experi­
ment were skewed. GEE relaxes the data distribution 
requirements and thus is more suitable for analyzing the 
data in this case.
In sum, behavioral performance data were analyzed using 
GEE, with AR warning types, traffic density, and collision 
types serving as the independent variables. The effects of 
each predictor and their interactions were evaluated by 
examining the model effects, parameter estimates, and esti­
mated marginal means. Estimated marginal means were uti­
lized to compare the effects of AR warnings across different 
conditions, with the Bonferroni correction applied in the 
GEE post-hoc test.
3.1. Reaction time
The collision type had a significant main effect on reaction 
time [Wald v2 (1) ¼ 124.228, p < 0.001]. The reaction time 
was significantly shorter in rear-end collisions compared to 
pedestrian collisions. The AR warning type had a significant 
main effect [Wald v2 (2) ¼ 67.034, p < 0.001], whereas traffic 
density [Wald v2 (1) ¼ 0.073, p ¼ 0.787] did not have a sig­
nificant effect. The results indicated that both the AR warn­
ings could effectively decrease the reaction time but the 
contact-analog warning was linked to a longer reaction time 
compared to the bounding box warning (p ¼ 0.012).
There was a significant interaction between AR warning 
types and collision types [Wald v2 (5)¼ 391.539, p< 0.001]. In 
the pedestrian collision condition, GEE post-hoc tests revealed 
that both AR warning groups were accompanied by shorter 
reaction times when compared to non-warning groups (the 
contact-analog warning: p< 0.001; the bounding box warning: 
p< 0.001), and the reaction time was longer under the con­
tact-analog warning compared to the bounding box warning 
(p< 0.001). Moreover, in the rear-end collision condition, GEE 
post-hoc tests revealed that both AR warning groups could 
effectively reduce the reaction time compared to the non-warn­
ing group (the contact-analog warning: p< 0.001; the bound­
ing box warning: p< 0.001), but no significant difference 
between the bounding box warning and the contact-analog 
warning (p¼ 0.293). These results suggested that the different 
impact of the AR warning was primarily evident in the percep­
tion of pedestrians.
There was a significant interaction between collision types 
and traffic density [Wald v2 (3) ¼ 156.085, p < 0.001]. In the 
rear-end collision condition, GEE post-hoc tests indicated 
that reaction time was longer under the low traffic density 
compared to the high traffic density (p ¼ 0.011), whereas no 
significant difference was found between the traffic density 
in the pedestrian collision condition (p ¼ 0.055).
There was a significant interaction observed between traf­
fic density and AR warning types [Wald v2 (5) ¼ 91.171, 
p < 0.001]. GEE post-hoc tests revealed that both AR warn­
ing groups were significantly better than the non-warning 
group in the high- traffic density condition (the contact-ana­
log 
warning: 
p < 0.001; 
the 
bounding 
box 
warning: 
p < 0.001) and in the low-traffic density condition (the con­
tact-analog warning: p < 0.001; the bounding box warning: 
p < 0.001). However, it is worth noting that the bounding 
box warning was related to a shorter reaction time than the 
contact-analog warning (in the high traffic density condi­
tion: p ¼ 0.019; in the low traffic density condition: 
p ¼ 0.015).
Significant interactions were observed for the three-way 
interaction effect. Our findings revealed a significant inter­
action between collision types, traffic density, and AR warn­
ing types [Wald v2 (11) ¼ 445.855, p < 0.001]. The effect of 
the AR warning groups was better than the non-warning 
group in different situations. However, the effect of the two 
AR warning groups varied in different conditions. In the 
pedestrian collision condition, the reaction time was lower 
when using the bounding box warning compared to the 
contact-analog warning for both high (p < 0.001) and low 
(p ¼ 0.003) traffic densities. However, in the rear-end colli­
sion condition, no significant difference between the bound­
ing box warning and the contact-analog warning in both 
high (p ¼ 0.613) and low (p ¼ 0.124) traffic density condi­
tions. The results indicated that it was appropriate to con­
sider the use of different warning graphics depending on 
Figure 5. Stage of procedure.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
7

--- Page 9 ---
the collision types. The detailed results can be found in 
Figure 6. Table 1 summarizes the descriptive result under 
different conditions.
3.2. Response rate
As for response rate, there was no significant effects were 
observed for collision types [Wald v2 (1) ¼ 1.345, p ¼ 0.246], 
traffic density [Wald v2 (1) ¼ 0.024, p ¼ 0.876], and AR 
warning types [Wald v2 (2) ¼ 0.733 p ¼ 0.693].
Similarly, no significant interactions were found in the 
results for the response rate. That is, collision type and traf­
fic density [Wald v2 (3) ¼ 5.680, p ¼ 0.128], collision type 
and AR warnings [Wald v2 (5) ¼ 4. 713, p ¼ 0.452], traffic 
density and AR warning type [Wald v2 (5) ¼ 0.921, 
p ¼ 0.969], and collision type, traffic density, and AR warn­
ing type [Wald v2 (11) ¼ 9.159, p ¼ 0.607] did not have an 
interaction. We suspected that this result might be related to 
the fact that unexpected hazards (i.e., leading vehicles and 
crossing pedestrians) end up very close to directly in front 
of the driver, so drivers were able to respond to unexpected 
hazards in most cases. Therefore, the response rate did not 
reach significant differences among the three groups in 
different situations. We further investigated the above results 
by examining the GEE post-hoc results. We found that while 
not reaching a significant difference, the response rate of the 
non-warning group was overall lower than that of the warn­
ing groups. Moreover, the bounding box warning group had 
a lower response rate than the contact-analog warning group 
in rear- end collisions, this suggested that the contact-analog 
warning group might have a slight advantage in rear-end 
collisions. Table 2 presents the GEE result of AR warning 
Figure 6. Effect of AR warning types and traffic density on reaction time under rear-end collision (A) and pedestrian collision (B).
Table 1. Corresponding mean (SD) of reaction time and response rate of AR warnings under different driving conditions.
Dependent variable
AR warning type
Rear-end collisions
Pedestrian collisions
High traffic density
Low traffic density
High traffic density
Low traffic density
Reaction time
CA
686.66 (284.27)
804.28 (350.58)
1507.70 (435.57)
1354.52 (433.88)
BB
835.28 (426.96)
824.51 (285.61)
1062.83 (392.85)
1051.32 (347.90)
Non
1188.09 (456.07)
1341.51 (501.15)
2131.44 (296.16)
1976.30 (370.91)
Response rate
CA
96.87% (0.176)
96.88% (0.176)
87.50% (0.336)
96.87% (0.176)
BB
96.87% (0.176)
87.50% (0.336)
93.75% (0.245)
96.87% (0.176)
Non
96.88% (0.176)
93.75% (0.245)
81.25% (0.396)
90.62% (0.296)
CA: the contact-analog warning; BB: the bounding box warning; Non: non-warning.
Table 2. GEE results for reaction time and response rate under different 
conditions.
Reaction time
Response rate
Main effects
Wald v2
p
Wald v2
p
Collision type
124.228
<0.001
1.345
0.246
Traffic density
.0073
0.787
.024
0.876
AR warning type
67.034
<0.001
.733
0.693
Two-factor interactions
Collision typeTraffic density
156.085
<0.001
5.680
0.128
Collision typeAR warning type
391.539
<0.001
4.713
0.452
Traffic densityAR warning type
91.171
<0.001
.921
0.969
Three-factor interactions
Collision typeTraffic densityAR  
warning type
445.855
<0.001
9.159
0.607
Note. p < 0.001.
8
W. CHEN ET AL.

--- Page 10 ---
types, collision types, and traffic density on the reaction 
time and response rate.
3.3. UEQ score
The UEQ provides scores on six different scales: attractive­
ness, perspicuity, efficiency, dependability, novelty, and stimu­
lation - each of them was examined separately. Additionally, 
five benchmark levels (excellent, good, above average, below 
average, and awful) can be utilized to further categorize 
scores, facilitating comparisons across a broader range of 
UEQ ratings (Plewan et al., 2021; Schrepp et al., 2017).
The six subscales of the UEQ offer a more comprehensive 
evaluation of the two AR warning types. The bounding box 
warning received significantly higher ratings on the perspicu­
ity scale (p ¼ 0.003) and the dependability scale (p ¼ 0.026). 
For perspicuity and dependability scales, the bounding box 
warning was rated as excellent, while the contact-analog 
warning was rated as below average for both. Although there 
were no statistically significant differences on the scales of 
attractiveness (p ¼ 0.14), efficiency (p ¼ 0.22), and stimulation 
(p ¼ 0.39), the bounding box warning was still correlated with 
higher scores. Additionally, it is noteworthy that the bound­
ing box warning received a lower score than the contact- 
analog warning in terms of novelty (p ¼ 0.67). Overall, the 
bounding box warning was rated as below average in stimula­
tion only, whereas the contact-analog warning received 
below-average ratings in the categories of attractiveness, per­
spicuity, dependability, and stimulation. Table 3 presents the 
detailed results of the UEQ scores.
4. Discussion
The results of this study demonstrate that the two AR warn­
ings have varying effects in different collision types. For 
instance, in the pedestrian collision scenario, the bounding 
box warning proves to be more effective, whereas, in the 
rear-end collision scenario, the contact-analog warning 
appears to hold a slight advantage. In the subsequent sec­
tion, we will initially analyze the effects of the two AR warn­
ings in different collision types to summarize the value of 
their application in the design of future AR-HUD warning 
interfaces. Subsequently, considering the disparities in the 
level of perceptual processing between the two AR warnings, 
we will further investigate the impact of the level of graph­
ical processing on the warning from a cognitive perspective. 
We aim for the analysis from a cognitive processing 
perspective to broaden future research directions in the field 
of warning.
4.1. Consideration of AR warnings on AR-HUD warning 
interface design
The findings reveal that all AR warnings exhibited a signifi­
cant enhancement in task performance in terms of reaction 
time when compared to the non-warning group, for both 
high and low-traffic density conditions. Notably, the bound­
ing box warning exhibited a significantly faster reaction time 
in comparison to the contact-analog warning. This result 
partially confirmed that both AR warning types were effect­
ive in the AR-HUD warning interface, but the contact- 
analog warning might not be as effective as we expected.
Considering the collision types, a distinct disparity in the 
impact of the two AR warnings was observed. The driver’s 
reaction time did not significantly differ between the con­
tact-analog warning and the bounding box warning in 
rear-end collisions. However, in pedestrian collisions, the 
bounding box warning considerably reduced the driver’s 
reaction time compared to the contact-analog warning. This 
result aligns with a prior study by Jing et al. (2022). They 
compared two AR warning interfaces in various scenarios 
and the result similarly demonstrated that AR warnings 
showed different effects in different scenarios. Evidently, 
scenarios could affect hazard detection (Crundall et al., 
2012), and lead drivers to adapt their reactions accordingly 
(Winkler et al., 2018). As such, the scenario characteristics 
can influence the effectiveness of AR warnings (Hwang 
et al., 2016). This scenario effect could potentially be attrib­
uted to the disparate positions of these two scenarios within 
the driver’s field of view.
In the course of driving, the leading vehicle consistently 
remains within the driver’s central vision (longitudinal inci­
dents), whereas unpredictable pedestrians frequently enter 
the driver’s peripheral vision (lateral incidents). Extensive 
research has substantiated that the fidelity of representation 
varies across the visual field (Rosenholtz, 2011). Although 
information in the initial forward field of vision was accur­
ately reported, details in the peripheral field were either dis­
regarded or not registered (Rosenholtz, 2011; Thomas & 
Wickens, 2001). Additionally, Dozza (2013) highlighted 
significantly longer response times exhibited by drivers dur­
ing lateral incidents compared to longitudinal incidents. 
Consequently, the driver excels in processing information 
within the central vision but displays relative inefficiency in 
processing information within the peripheral vision (Chen 
et al., 2023).
Hence, in the case of rear-end collisions, the provision of 
a warning, be it a contact-analog or bounding box warning, 
proved adequate in drawing the driver’s attention and 
enhancing their response. However, the findings also dem­
onstrated a greater response rate of the contact-analog warn­
ings (albeit statistically insignificant) in rear-end collisions. 
One potential explanation could be associated with its pre­
cise overlay on the imminent hazards through color. 
Previous studies involving neurological patients have 
Table 3. The mean score, standard deviation (SD), and the comparative result 
of UEQ for AR warnings.
UEQ
Contact-analog warning
Bounding box warning
p
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
Attractiveness
1.15
1.04
1.66
0.86
0.14
Perspicuity
1.08
1.26
2.25
0.52
0.003
Efficiency
1.27
0.99
1.67
0.85
0.22
Dependability
1.13
0.89
1.78
0.68
0.026
Stimulation
0.63
0.89
0.92
1.02
0.39
Novelty
0.94
1.03
0.75
1.38
0.67
Note. p < 0.05, p < 0.01.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
9

--- Page 11 ---
demonstrated that color discrimination can occur without 
conscious awareness (Breitmeyer et al., 2004; Tao et al., 
2017; Tarenskeen et al., 2015; Ward & Helton, 2022). And 
the size of color patches has an impact on our perception 
(Badiane et al., 2017; Johnson, 2014). Contact-analog warn­
ings were created by using a large color-covered area on the 
leading car, which had a more significant presence in the 
central vision than the bounding box warning. The blending 
of colors between the AR warning and the physical object 
can lead to enhanced visual connectivity, which positively 
impacts the driver’s perception (Jing et al., 2022). Thus, the 
contact-analog warning exhibited a higher level of effective­
ness compared to the bounding box warning, especially 
within the central vision, resulting in a higher response rate.
However, in the case of pedestrian collisions, the impact 
of AR warning types displayed a noteworthy disparity. The 
results indicated that drivers exhibited longer response times 
under contact-analog warning while the bounding box 
warning offered an effective cautionary measure for pedes­
trian crossings, ensuring optimal human performance in AR 
driving conditions. It signified that color-based searching 
was less effective in the pedestrian collision condition. 
Interestingly, prior studies suggested that color-based search­
ing was more efficient than shape-based searching (Hwang 
et al., 2016; Ng-Thow-Hing et al., 2013). This conflict dis­
covery prompted us to re-evaluate the distinctive attributes 
of warnings that could impact perception during the search 
process, while also factoring in the statistically significant 
variations in effects between the bounding box warning and 
the contact-analog warning in pedestrian collisions.
The differential saliency of the contact-analog and bound­
ing box warnings in peripheral vision offers one possible 
explanation for the contradictory findings. The contact- 
analog warning was incorporated into the actual environ­
ment by utilizing the pedestrian’s geolocation, causing its 
apparent size (as measured by relative size and height in the 
driver’s visual field) to adjust as the driver approached the 
pedestrian in question (Kim et al., 2018). Typically, pedes­
trians initially come into view in the peripheral vision from a 
distance, and then gradually move toward the driver’s central 
vision (Domeyer et al., 2022). As a result, when pedestrians 
appeared on the peripheral roadside, the contact-analog warn­
ing occupied a relatively small area in the driver’s field of 
vision, thereby reducing its saliency. Additionally, the color- 
induced masking and overlapping within the contact-analog 
warning may create the perception of an object located fur­
ther away, potentially leading to erroneous driver decisions 
(Ng-Thow-Hing et al., 2013). Furthermore, the presence of 
peripheral pedestrians did not elicit the same level of stimula­
tion in drivers compared to the preceding vehicles in the cen­
ter (Hwang et al., 2016). The peripheral vision generally 
presents higher thresholds for most perceptual tasks com­
pared to the central vision (Finlay, 1982). Thus, employing 
color as an exogenous cue to enhance peripheral pedestrian 
detection was effective only within the active field of view 
(Ward & Helton, 2022). Taking all these factors into consid­
eration, drivers exhibit slower response times to the contact- 
analog warning. Conversely, while the bounding box warning 
may have covered extraneous objects, it covers a larger area 
compared to the contact-analog warning and is more salient 
in the peripheral field of view to some extent. This suggests 
that the positive effect of a larger area of the bounding box 
warning may offset the negative effect of covering other 
objects in the peripheral field of view. Earlier studies have 
also shown that the presence of a bounding box substantially 
enhanced driver performance in response to unpredictable 
peripheral events (e.g., Chen et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2021). 
Above all, in the peripheral field of view, a bounding box 
warning may be more effective.
The subjective attitude toward the different AR warnings 
was assessed by obtaining ratings from the user experience 
questionnaire (UEQ). This subjective data serves as a valu­
able complement to behavioral data (Plewan et al., 2021). 
The results of the subjective rating aligned with the behav­
ioral data. The bounding box warning was generally rated 
higher in terms of attractiveness, perspicuity, efficiency, 
dependability, and stimulation. Particularly, the bounding 
box warning was rated as excellent in perspicuity and 
dependability scales, while the contact-analog warning was 
rated as below average for both. However, it is worth noting 
that drivers perceived the contact-analog warning as more 
novel, although the differences were not statistically 
significant.
Overall, our findings indicate that future AR-HUD warn­
ing interfaces need to consider the specific characteristics of 
different scenarios and use appropriate AR warnings accord­
ingly. In pedestrian collision scenarios, we advocate for the 
use of bounding box warnings to improve the detection of 
peripheral pedestrians. Such warnings are more likely to 
attract attention in the peripheral vision, thus effectively 
alerting the driver. Conversely, in rear-end collision scen­
arios, we propose employing contact-analog warnings to 
specifically alert the driver of the leading vehicle’s braking 
actions. These warnings can effectively communicate a sense 
of danger by displaying a significant color area in the driv­
er’s central vision.
4.2. Investigation of the impact of graphics processing 
levels on warning
Additionally, the perspective of perception provides an add­
itional framework for interpreting our findings. Previous 
studies have suggested that understanding human perception 
of graphics can inspire shape analysis, pattern recognition, 
and object recognition (Ullman et al., 2002). According to a 
traditional view of visual perception, it involves low-level 
and high-level processing stages (Lamberts & Goldstone, 
2005). The early visual area encodes raw information in the 
low-level processing stage, and the task is to interpret this 
raw information to enable the perception of people or 
objects in reality (i.e., object recognition) in the high-level 
processing stage (Ullman, 1996). Generally, the human vis­
ual system efficiently extracts local elements from cluttered 
backgrounds and integrates these elements into meaningful 
perception, which is a critical step before object recognition 
(Li et al., 2017).
10
W. CHEN ET AL.

--- Page 12 ---
Given this context, we hypothesize that contact-analog 
warnings, which provide the contour of unexpected stimuli 
compared to bounding box warnings, involve higher levels 
of visual processing. Bounding box warnings direct the driv­
er’s attention to the hazard through a simple, salient geo­
metric shape, leading to a generalized representation of the 
visual warning in a short period (e.g., the spatial presence of 
the imminent hazard). This process involves low-level visual 
processing. In contrast, contact-analog warnings provide the 
complex contour characteristics of critical hazards. Contours 
often play an essential role in defining the types of objects 
to be recognized (Li et al., 2017). Drivers not only sense the 
spatial presence of the visual warning but also interpret and 
recognize the contour of the contact-analog warning (i.e., 
judging whether it is a pedestrian, a vehicle, or other driv­
ing-related objects). This process involves high-level visual 
processing. Information theory suggests that the more infor­
mation a graphic has, the more effort is required to process 
it (Rigau et al., 2005).
Consequently, there are variations in the time required to 
process responses to these warnings due to differences in 
visual processing levels. For instance, drivers only need to 
recognize the simple shape of the bounding box and localize 
potential hazards by the location where the bounding box 
warnings appear, resulting in a shorter response time. 
Conversely, drivers have longer response times for the con­
tact-analog warning because they not only locate potential 
hazards through the location of the contact-analog warning 
but also recognize the contour of the contact-analog warn­
ing to determine the type of hazard. This result is consistent 
with the findings of Winkler et al. (2018), who investigated 
the effect of the degree of specificity of warnings. The results 
showed that generic warnings allow for better results by trig­
gering a driver response even when the type of safety-critical 
object has not been identified. They proposed that differenti­
ating the warning might add to drivers’ already high cogni­
tive load. Given the dynamic nature of AR graphics, the 
driver not only needs to interact with the dynamic environ­
ment but also recognize the warning which affected by the 
environment (Kim et al., 2016). Therefore, the driver’s per­
ceptual processing process may be more difficult. It is cru­
cial to provide warnings in a form that corresponds to the 
drivers’ perceptual ability.
Additionally, a notable difference in response time was 
observed within the peripheral vision for these two AR 
warnings. Considering the limited capacity of the peripheral 
vision for processing detailed information (Vater et al., 
2022), these findings suggest that graphics requiring high- 
level processing stages may not be suitable for presentation 
in the peripheral vision. Moreover, the peripheral field of 
view primarily serves to detect the scene gist and direct the 
driver’s attention to it (Larson & Loschky, 2009; Vater et al., 
2022). Currently, due to technical limitations, the existing 
ADASs primarily use head-down displays (HDDs), while 
common head-up displays (HUDs) have limited presentation 
areas, mostly within 3–5 inches (Van Krevelen & Poelman, 
2010). Consequently, warning information is predominantly 
presented in the driver’s peripheral vision. Investigating the 
perceptual capabilities of graphics that the peripheral vision 
can effectively process is crucial, as is striking a reasonable 
balance between information provision and the processing 
level of graphics. This finding may also encourage future 
research on road signs to consider appropriate simplification 
of their graphic presentations, especially considering that 
road signs and other signage are primarily located in the 
peripheral field of view (Costa et al., 2018).
In summary, previous studies have already explored 
methods for adjusting the physical parameters of the HMI 
interface to improve the presentation of warning- related 
information (e.g., Morita et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2022). 
However, an intriguing aspect of warning design is consider­
ing the perceptual level of the warning. When it comes to 
auditory warnings, drivers face challenges in processing and 
interpreting the information conveyed through auditory 
icons and earcons (Amer & Johnson, 2018). The findings of 
this experiment suggest that a similar phenomenon may also 
apply to visual graphical warnings. Subsequent research 
should address how to strike a balance.
5. Limitations
There are several limitations to consider when interpreting 
the findings of this study. Firstly, it should be noted that 
video clips were used as materials in accordance with previ­
ous studies (e.g., Chen et al., 2023; Eyraud et al., 2015; 
Hwang et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2021). As a result, the reac­
tion tasks employed in this study, such as watching video 
clips and pressing buttons in response to unpredictable 
events, were relatively simple and lacked complexity. 
Therefore, it is uncertain whether these findings can be gen­
eralized to more complex driving conditions. Secondly, des­
pite the use of real AR devices to provide a realistic AR 
driving experience, issues related to depth perception and 
focal switching distance still remain due to the overlay of 
virtual images on physical objects. These factors could 
potentially affect the validity of the results. Thirdly, it is 
important to acknowledge that the real traffic environment 
is significantly more complex than the simulated scenarios 
used in this study. This raises concerns about the ecological 
validity of the findings, as the actual driving conditions may 
introduce additional variables not accounted for in the 
experimental design. Fourth, in this study, we are concerned 
with visible hazards, while the difference in effectiveness 
between the contact-analog warning and the bounding box 
warning for invisible hazards remains to be investigated. 
Furthermore, it is important to note that the between-sub­
jects design used in this study may result in limited data 
being collected in each AR warning group. The rationale 
behind the between-subjects design choice was to maintain a 
certain level of novelty for participants in response to unex­
pected stimuli and their AR-HUD warnings, as well as to 
minimize subject fatigue by keeping the experiment duration 
relatively short. However, future studies could consider 
increasing the sample size or utilizing a within-subjects 
design to further investigate the effectiveness of AR-HUD 
warnings. Lastly, it should be noted that the majority of 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
11

--- Page 13 ---
participants in this experiment were Chinese novice drivers 
without prior experience in using AR-HUD devices. 
Considering that drivers’ familiarity with the system may 
influence their performance (Dingus et al., 1997), future 
studies should aim to recruit participants with more driving 
experience or prior experience using AR-HUD devices to 
further explore the effects of AR warnings. Given these limi­
tations, additional research is necessary to validate and 
broaden the current findings, to achieve a more comprehen­
sive comprehension of the influence and efficacy of AR- 
HUD warnings in diverse driving circumstances and among 
various driver demographics.
6. Conclusion
The objective of this study was to examine the impact of 
two types of AR warnings, namely the contact-analog warn­
ing and the bounding box warning, in different collision 
scenarios and traffic densities. Our findings indicate that 
both types of AR warnings were effective in both high and 
low-traffic-density conditions. Furthermore, we recommend 
incorporating different AR warnings into the design of the 
AR interface based on the specific collision types. In the 
case of rear-end collisions, both the bounding box warning 
and the contact-analog warning were effective. However, the 
contact-analog warning demonstrated slightly higher suit­
ability for rear-end collisions. Conversely, for pedestrian col­
lisions, the bounding box warning was found to be more 
effective compared to the contact-analog warning. These 
findings highlight the importance of tailoring AR warnings 
to specific collision types. By adhering to these recommen­
dations, future AR interface designs can optimize the use of 
different AR warnings to enhance driver safety in various 
collision scenarios and traffic conditions. Furthermore, we 
analyze the aforementioned two types of graphs in connec­
tion with the cognitive processing perspective. The findings 
also suggest that, in the future, the field of warning design 
should consider the potential impact on warning effective­
ness arising from the varying perceptual processing levels of 
the graphs in individuals.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for 
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This work 
was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China 
under Grants (72371228, T2192930, T2192931, and 31900768).
References
Abdi, L., Takrouni, W., & Meddeb, A. (2017). In-vehicle cooperative 
driver information systems. In 2013 17th International Wireless 
Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC) (pp. 
396–401). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/iwcmc.2017.7986319
Adams, H., Stefanucci, J. K., Creem-Regehr, S. H., & Bodenheimer, B. 
(2022). Depth perception in augmented reality: The effects of dis­
play, shadow, and position. In 2022 IEEE Conference on Virtual 
Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR) (pp. 792–801). IEEE. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/vr51125.2022.00101
Amer, T. S., & Johnson, T. L. (2018). Earcons versus auditory icons in 
communicating computing events: Learning and user preference. 
International Journal of Technology and Human Interaction, 14(4), 
95–109. https://doi.org/10.4018/IJTHI.2018100106
Ariansyah, D., Erkoyuncu, J. A., Eimontaite, I., Johnson, T., Oostveen, 
A.-M., Fletcher, S., & Sharples, S. (2022). A head mounted aug­
mented reality design practice for maintenance assembly: Toward 
meeting perceptual and cognitive needs of AR users. Applied 
Ergonomics, 98, 103597. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103597
Badiane, A., Perez I de Lanuza, G., Garcıa-Custodio, M. C., Carazo, P., 
& Font, E. (2017). Colour patch size and measurement error using 
reflectance spectrophotometry. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 
8(11), 1585–1593. https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.12801
Beck, M. R., Lohrenz, M. C., & Trafton, J. G. (2010). Measuring search 
efficiency in complex visual search tasks: Global and local clutter. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 16(3), 238–250. https:// 
doi.org/10.1037/a0019633
Breitmeyer, B. G., Ro, T., & Singhal, N. S. (2004). Unconscious color 
priming occurs at stimulus–Not percept-dependent levels of process­
ing. Psychological Science, 15(3), 198–202. https://doi.org/10.1111/j. 
0956-7976.2004.01503009.x
Brijs, T., Mauriello, F., Montella, A., Galante, F., Brijs, K., & Ross, V. 
(2022). Studying the effects of an advanced driver-assistance system 
to improve safety of cyclists overtaking. Accident Analysis & 
Prevention, 174(1), 106763. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2022.106763
Calvi, A., D’Amico, F., Ferrante, C., & Bianchini Ciampoli, L. (2020). 
Effectiveness of augmented reality warnings on driving behaviour 
whilst approaching pedestrian crossings: A driving simulator study. 
Accident Analysis & Prevention, 147, 105760. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.aap.2020.105760
Campbell, J. I., & Thompson, V. A. (2012). MorePower 6.0 for 
ANOVA with relational confidence intervals and Bayesian analysis. 
Behavior Research Methods, 44(4), 1255–1265. https://doi.org/10. 
3758/s13428-012-0186-0
Chen, W., Song, J., Wang, Y., Wu, C., Ma, S., Wang, D., Yang, Z., & 
Li, H. (2023). Inattentional blindness to unexpected hazard in aug­
mented reality head-up display assisted driving: The impact of the 
relative position between stimulus and augmented graph. Traffic 
Injury Prevention, 24(4), 344–351. https://doi.org/10.1080/15389588. 
2023.2186735
Costa, M., Bonetti, L., Vignali, V., Lantieri, C., & Simone, A. (2018). 
The role of peripheral vision in vertical road sign identification and 
discrimination. Ergonomics, 61(12), 1619–1634. https://doi.org/10. 
1080/00140139.2018.1508756
Crundall, D., Chapman, P., Trawley, S., Collins, L., van Loon, E., 
Andrews, B., & Underwood, G. (2012). Some hazards are more 
attractive than others: Drivers of varying experience respond differ­
ently to different types of hazard. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 
45, 600–609. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2011.09.049
Dai, L., Zhang, K., Zheng, X. S., Martin, R. R., Li, Y., & Yu, J. (2021). 
Visual complexity of shapes: A hierarchical perceptual learning 
model. The Visual Computer, 38(2), 419–432. https://doi.org/10. 
1007/s00371-020-02023-z
Dingus, T. A., Hulse, M. C., Mollenhauer, M. A., Fleischman, R. N., 
McGehee, D. V., & Manakkal, N. (1997). Effects of age, system 
experience, and navigation technique on driving with an advanced 
traveler information system. Human Factors, 39(2), 177–199. https:// 
doi.org/10.1518/001872097778543804
Domeyer, J. E., Lee, J. D., Toyoda, H., Mehler, B., & Reimer, B. (2022). 
Driver-pedestrian 
perceptual 
models 
demonstrate 
coupling: 
Implications for vehicle automation. IEEE Transactions on Human- 
Machine Systems, 52(4), 557–566. https://doi.org/10.1109/THMS. 
2022.3158201
12
W. CHEN ET AL.

--- Page 14 ---
Dozza, M. (2013). What factors influence drivers’ response time for 
evasive maneuvers in real traffic? Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 
58, 299–308. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2012.06.003
Dr€uke, J., Semmler, C., & Bendewald, L. (2018). The “HMI tool kit” as 
a strategy for the systematic derivation of user-oriented HMI con­
cepts of driver assistance systems in urban areas. In K. Bengler, J. 
Dr€uke, S. Hoffmann, D. Manstetten, & A. Neukum (Eds.), Urban 
human factors in traffic (pp. 53–74). Springer Vieweg. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/978-3-658-15418-9_4
Edquist, J., & Johnston, I. (2008). Visual clutter in road environments: 
What it does, and what to do about it. In Proceeding of Australasian 
Road Safety Research, Policing and Education Conference (pp. 733– 
738). South Australia Department for Transport, Energy and 
Infrastructure.
Eyraud, R., Zibetti, E., & Baccino, T. (2015). Allocation of visual atten­
tion while driving with simulated augmented reality. Transportation 
Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 32, 46–55. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2015.04.011
Faria, O., Gabbard, J. L., & Smith, M. (2020). Place in the world or 
place on the screen? investigating the effects of augmented reality 
head-up display user interfaces on drivers’ spatial knowledge acqui­
sition and glance behavior. In 2020 IEEE Conference on Virtual 
Reality and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW) (pp. 
762–763). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/VRW50115.2020.00232
Finlay, D. (1982). Motion perception in the peripheral visual field. 
Perception, 11(4), 457–462. https://doi.org/10.1068/p110457
Friedrich, M., & Vollrath, M. (2022). Urgency-based color coding to 
support visual search in displays for supervisory control of multiple 
unmanned aircraft systems. Displays, 74, 102185. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.displa.2022.102185
Gabbard, J. L., Fitch, G. M., & Kim, H. (2014). Behind the glass: 
Driver challenges and opportunities for AR automotive applications. 
Proceedings of the IEEE, 102(2), 124–136. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
JPROC.2013.2294642
Gabbard, J. L., Swan, J. E., Hix, D., Schulman, R. S., Lucas, J., & 
Gupta, D. (2005). An empirical user-based study of text drawing 
styles and outdoor background textures for augmented reality. In 
IEEE Proceedings. VR 2005. Virtual Reality, 2005 (pp. 11–317). 
IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/VR.2005.1492748
Grubert, J., Langlotz, T., Zollmann, S., & Regenbrecht, H. (2017). 
Towards pervasive augmented reality: Context-awareness in aug­
mented reality. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer 
Graphics, 23(6), 1706–1724. https://doi.org/10.1109/tvcg.2016.2543720
Hajiseyedjavadi, F., Zhang, T., Agrawal, R., Knodler, M., Fisher, D., & 
Samuel, S. (2018). Effectiveness of visual warnings on young drivers 
hazard anticipation and hazard mitigation abilities. Accident; 
Analysis and Prevention, 116, 41–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap. 
2017.11.037
Huang, Y.-Y., & Menozzi, M. (2022). Effects of viewing distance and 
age on the performance and symptoms in a visual search task in 
augmented reality. Applied Ergonomics, 102(3), 103746. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.apergo.2022.103746
Hwang, Y., Park, B.-J., & Kim, K.-H. (2016). The effects of augmented- 
reality head-up display system usage on drivers risk perception and 
psychological change. ETRI Journal, 38(4), 757–766. https://doi.org/ 
10.4218/etrij.16.0115.0770
Hwang, Y.-S., & Kim, K.-H. (2016). Effects of the displaying aug­
mented-reality information on the driving behavior of the drivers 
with specific psychological characteristics. In 2016 6th International 
Conference on IT Convergence and Security (ICITCS) (pp. 1–2). 
IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICITCS.2016.7740328
Jing, C., Shang, C., Yu, D., Chen, Y., & Zhi, J.-Y. (2022). The impact 
of different AR-HUD virtual warning interfaces on the takeover per­
formance and visual characteristics of autonomous vehicles. Traffic 
Injury Prevention, 23(5), 277–282. https://doi.org/10.1080/15389588. 
2022.2055752
Johnson, J. (2014). Our color vision is limited. In J. Johnson (Ed.), 
Designing with the mind in mind (pp. 37–47). Morgan Kaufmann. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B9780124079144.00004X
Kim, H., Gabbard, J. L., Anon, A. M., & Misu, T. (2018). Driver behav­
ior and performance with augmented reality pedestrian collision 
warning: An outdoor user study. IEEE Transactions on Visualization 
and Computer Graphics, 24(4), 1515–1524. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
tvcg.2018.2793680
Kim, H., & Gabbard, J. L. (2019). Assessing distraction potential of 
augmented reality head-up displays for vehicle drivers. Human 
Factors, 64(5), 852–865. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720819844845
Kim, H., Isleib, J. D., & Gabbard, J. L. (2016). Virtual shadow: Making 
cross traffic dynamics visible through augmented reality head up 
display. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 
Annual 
Meeting, 
60(1), 
2093–2097. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
1541931213601474
Kim, K., & Hwang, Y. (2016). The usefulness of augmenting reality on 
vehicle head-up display. In N. Stanton, S. Landry, G. Di 
Bucchianico, & A. Vallicelli (Eds.), Advances in intelligent systems 
and computing (pp. 655–662). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 
3-319-41682-3_55
Lamberts, K., & Goldstone, R. L. (2005). Handbook of cognition. SAGE 
Publications Ltd. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781848608177
Langlois, S., & Soualmi, B. (2016). Augmented reality versus classical 
HUD to take over from automated driving: An aid to smooth reac­
tions and to anticipate maneuvers. In 2016 IEEE 19th International 
Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC) (pp. 1571– 
1578). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ITSC.2016.7795767
Larson, A. M., & Loschky, L. C. (2009). The contributions of central 
versus peripheral vision to scene gist recognition. Journal of Vision, 
9(10), 6. https://doi.org/10.1167/9.10.6
Laugwitz, B., Held, T., & Schrepp, M. (2008). Construction and evalu­
ation of a user experience questionnaire. Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, 5298, 63–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-89350-9_6
Lee, J., Lee, N., Ju, J., Chae, J., Park, J., Ryu, Y. S., & Cho, H. S. (2023). 
Visual complexity of head-up display in automobiles modulates 
attentional 
tunneling. 
Human 
Factors. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
00187208231181496
Li, Y., Wang, Y., & Li, S. (2017). Recurrent processing of contour inte­
gration in the human visual cortex as revealed by fMRI-Guided 
TMS. Cerebral Cortex, 29(1), 17–26. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/ 
bhx296
Li, Y., Zhang, X., Li, H., Zhou, Q., Cao, X., & Xiao, Z. (2019). Object 
detection and tracking under complex environment using deep 
learning-based LPM. IET Computer Vision, 13(2), 157–164. https:// 
doi.org/10.1049/iet-cvi.2018.5129
Liang, K. Y., & Zeger, S. L. (1986). Longitudinal data analysis using 
generalized linear models. Biometrika, 73(1), 13–22. https://doi.org/ 
10.1093/biomet/73.1.13
Ma, X., Jia, M., Hong, Z., Kwok, A. P. K., & Yan, M. (2021). Does aug­
mented-reality head-up display help? A preliminary study on driving 
performance through a VR-simulated eye movement analysis. IEEE 
Access, 9, 129951–129964. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021. 
3112240
Medenica, Z., Kun, A. L., Paek, T., & Palinko, O. (2011). Augmented 
reality vs. street views: a driving simulator study comparing two 
emerging navigation aids. In Proceedings of the 13th International 
Conference on Human–Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices 
and Services – MobileHCI’11 (pp. 265–274). Association for 
Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/2037373.2037414
Merenda, C., Kim, H., Tanous, K., Gabbard, J. L., Feichtl, B., Misu, T., 
& Suga, C. (2018). Augmented reality interface design approaches 
for 
goal-directed 
and 
stimulus-driven 
driving 
tasks. 
IEEE 
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 24(11), 2875– 
2885. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2018.2868531
Merenda, C., Smith, M., Gabbard, J. L., Burnett, G., & Large, D. 
(2016). Effects of real-world backgrounds on user interface color 
naming and matching in automotive AR HUDs. In 2016 IEEE VR 
2016 Workshop on Perceptual and Cognitive Issues in AR (PERCAR). 
IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/PERCAR.2016.7562419
Merenda, C., Suga, C., Gabbard, J. L., & Misu, T. (2019). Effects of 
“real-world” visual fidelity on AR interface assessment: A case study 
using AR head-up display graphics in driving. In 2019 IEEE 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
13

--- Page 15 ---
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR) 
(pp. 145–156). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISMAR.2019.00-10
Morita, K., Sekine, M., Tsukada, Y., Okada, T., Toyofuku, Y. (2007). 
Consideration on appropriate display area for head-up displays. In 
Proceedings of 14th Asia Pacific Automotive Engineering Conference 
(APAC). 
SAE. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://api.semanticscholar.org/ 
CorpusID:61679796 https://doi.org/10.4271/2007-01-3512
Muhrer, E., & Vollrath, M. (2011). The effect of visual and cognitive 
distraction on driver’s anticipation in a simulated car following 
scenario. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and 
Behaviour, 14(6), 555–566. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2011.06.003
Naish, J. M. (1964). Combination of information in superimposed vis­
ual fields. Nature, 202(4933), 641–646. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
202641a0
Navarro, J., Deniel, J., Yousfi, E., Jallais, C., Bueno, M., & Fort, A. 
(2017). Influence of lane departure warnings onset and reliability on 
car drivers’ behaviors. Applied Ergonomics, 59(Pt A), 123–131. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2016.08.010
Nelder, J. A., & Wedderburn, R. W. M. (1972). Generalized linear 
models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A (General), 
135(3), 370. https://doi.org/10.2307/2344614
Ng, A. W. Y., & Chan, A. H. S. (2018). Color associations among 
designers and non-designers for common warning and operation 
concepts. Applied Ergonomics, 70, 18–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apergo.2018.02.004
Ng-Thow-Hing, V., Bark, K., Beckwith, L., Tran, C., Bhandari, R., & 
Sridhar, S. (2013). User-centered perspectives for automotive aug­
mented reality. In 2013 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed 
and Augmented Reality – Arts, Media, and Humanities (ISMAR- 
AMH) (pp. 13–22). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISMAR-AMH. 
2013.6671262
Park, B.-J., Jeong Min, L., Yoon, C.-R., & Kim, K.-H. (2016). A study 
on augmented reality of a vehicle information using head-up dis­
play. In 2016 6th International Conference on IT Convergence and 
Security (ICITCS) (pp. 1–2). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICITCS. 
2016.7740308
Peereboom, J., Tabone, W., Dodou, D., & Winter, D. (2023). Head- 
locked, world-locked, or conformal diminished reality? An examin­
ation of different AR solutions for pedestrian safety in occluded 
scenarios.
Pitt, T. M., Howard, A., HubkaRao, T., & Hagel, B. (2021). Identifying 
modifiable factors related to novice adolescent driver fault in motor 
vehicle collisions. Traffic Injury Prevention, 22(6), 437–442. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/15389588.2021.1923700
Plewan, T., M€attig, B., Kretschmer, V., & Rinkenauer, G. (2021). 
Exploring the benefits and limitations of augmented reality for pal­
letization. Applied Ergonomics, 90(23), 103250. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.apergo.2020.103250
Powelleit, M., & Vollrath, M. (2019). Situational influences on response 
time and maneuver choice: Development of time-critical scenarios. 
Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 122, 48–62. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.aap.2018.09.021
Rane, P., Kim, H.-I., Lopez, J. L., & Gabbard, J. L. (2016). Virtual road 
signs: Augmented reality driving aid for novice drivers. Proceedings 
of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 
60(1), 1750–1754. https://doi.org/10.1177/1541931213601401
Riegler, A., Riener, A., & Holzmann, C. (2021). A systematic review of 
augmented reality applications for automated driving: 2009–2020. 
PRESENCE: Virtual and Augmented Reality, 28(4), 87–126. https:// 
doi.org/10.1162/pres_a_00343
Rigau, J., Feixas, M., & Sbert, M. (2005). An information theoretic 
framework for image complexity. In Computational Aesthetics’05: 
Proceedings of the First Eurographics Conference on Computational 
Aesthetics in Graphics, Visualization and Imaging (pp. 177–184). 
https://doi.org/10.2312/COMPAESTH/COMPAESTH05/177184
Rosenholtz, R. (2011). What your visual system sees where you are not 
looking. Proceedings of SPIE: Human Vision and Electronic Imaging, 
7865, 786510. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.876659
Rosenholtz, R., Li, Y., & Nakano, L. (2007). Measuring visual clutter. 
Journal of Vision, 7(2), 17–1722. https://doi.org/10.1167/7.2.17
Rusch, M. L., Schall, M. C., Gavin, P., Lee, J. D., Dawson, J. D., 
Vecera, S., & Rizzo, M. (2013). Directing driver attention with aug­
mented reality cues. Transportation Research Part F Traffic 
Psychology and Behaviour, 16(4), 127–137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
trf.2012.08.007
Schewe, F., & Vollrath, M. (2021). Ecological interface design and 
head-up displays: The contact-analog visualization tradeoff. Human 
Factors, 65(1), 37–49. https://doi.org/10.1177/00187208211009656
Schrepp, M., Hinderks, A., & Thomaschewski, J. (2017). Construction 
of a benchmark for the user experience questionnaire (UEQ). 
International Journal of Interactive Multimedia and Artificial 
Intelligence, 4(4), 40. https://doi.org/10.9781/ijimai.2017.445
Schubert, A., Babisch, S., Scanlon, J. M., Campolettano, E. T., Roessler, 
R., Unger, T., & McMurry, T. L. (2023). Passenger and heavy vehicle 
collisions with pedestrians: Assessment of injury mechanisms and 
risk. Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 190, 107139. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.aap.2023.107139
Schwarz, F., & Fastenmeier, W. (2018). Visual advisory warnings about 
hidden dangers: Effects of specific symbols and spatial referencing 
on necessary and unnecessary warnings. Applied Ergonomics, 72, 25– 
36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2018.05.001
Shakouri, M., Ikuma, L. H., Aghazadeh, F., Punniaraj, K., & Ishak, S. 
(2014). Effects of work zone configurations and traffic density on per­
formance variables and subjective workload. Accident; Analysis and 
Prevention, 71, 166–176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2014.05.016
Smith, M., Gabbard, J. L., Burnett, G., Hare, C., Singh, H., & Skrypchuk, 
L. (2021). Determining the impact of augmented reality graphic spa­
tial location and motion on driver behaviors. Applied Ergonomics, 
96(5), 103510. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103510
Tao, J., Niu, Y., & Lei, Z. (2017). Are the warning icons more atten­
tional? Applied Ergonomics, 65(2), 51–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apergo.2017.05.012
Tarenskeen, S., Broersma, M., & Geurts, B. (2015). Overspecification of 
color, pattern, and size: Salience, absoluteness, and consistency. Frontiers 
in Psychology, 6, 1703. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01703
Teh, E., Jamson, S., Carsten, O., & Jamson, H. (2014). Temporal fluctu­
ations in driving demand: The effect of traffic complexity on sub­
jective 
measures 
of 
workload 
and 
driving 
performance. 
Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 
22, 207–217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2013.12.005
Thomas, L. S., & Wickens, C. D. (2001). Visual displays and cognitive 
tunneling: Frames of reference effects on spatial judgments and 
change detection. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics 
Society Annual Meeting, 45(4), 336–340. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
154193120104500415
Tonnis, M., & Klinker, G. (2006, October 1). Effective control of a car 
driver’s attention for visual and acoustic guidance towards the direc­
tion of imminent dangers. In 2006 IEEE/ACM International 
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (pp. 13–22). IEEE. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ISMAR.2006.297789
Trick, L. M., Toxopeus, R., & Wilson, D. (2010). The effects of visibil­
ity conditions, traffic density, and navigational challenge on speed 
compensation and driving performance in older adults. Accident; 
Analysis and Prevention, 42(6), 1661–1671. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
aap.2010.04.005
Twisk, D. (1995). Factors contributing to the high accident liability of 
novice drivers and the role of driver training. SWOV Institute for 
Road Safety Research.
Ullman, S. (1996). High-level vision: Object recognition and visual cogni­
tion. The MIT Press. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/3496.001.0001
Ullman, S., Vidal-Naquet, M., & Sali, E. (2002). Visual features of 
intermediate complexity and their use in classification. Nature 
Neuroscience, 5(7), 682–687. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn870
Van Krevelen, D. W. F., & Poelman, R. (2010). A survey of augmented 
reality technologies, applications and limitations. International 
Journal of Virtual Reality, 9(2), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.20870/IJVR. 
2010.9.2.2767
Vater, C., Wolfe, B., & Rosenholtz, R. (2022). Peripheral vision in real- 
world tasks: A systematic review. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 
29(5), 1531–1557. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-022-02117-w
14
W. CHEN ET AL.

--- Page 16 ---
Wang, Y., Song, J., An, X., Ma, S., Li, H., Wang, D., & Yang, Z. 
(2022). Head-up display graphic warning to support collision avoid­
ance: Effect of graphic animation and border on driving behavior 
and eye movement pattern. Transportation Research Record: Journal 
of the Transportation Research Board, 2677(5), 636–652. https://doi. 
org/10.1177/03611981221134628
Wang, Y., Wu, Y., Chen, C., Wu, B., Ma, S., Wang, D., Li, H., & Yang, Z. 
(2021). Inattentional blindness in augmented reality head-up display- 
assisted driving. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 
38(9), 837–850. https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2021.1970434
Ward, M., & Helton, W. S. (2022). More or less? Improving monocular 
head-mounted display assisted visual search by reducing guidance 
precision. Applied Ergonomics, 102(7), 103720. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.apergo.2022.103720
Werneke, J., & Vollrath, M. (2013). How to present collision warnings at 
intersections—A comparison of different approaches. Accident; Analysis 
and Prevention, 52, 91–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2012.12.001
Wickens, C. D., & Long, J. (1994). Conformal symbology, attention 
shifts, and the head-up display. Proceedings of the Human Factors 
and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 38(1), 6–10. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/154193129403800103
Winkler, S., Kazazi, J., & Vollrath, M. (2018). How to warn drivers in 
various safety-critical situations – Different strategies, different reac­
tions. Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 117, 410–426. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.aap.2018.01.040
Winkler, S., Werneke, J., & Vollrath, M. (2016). Timing of early warn­
ing stages in a multi stage collision warning system: Drivers’ evalu­
ation depending on situational influences. Transportation Research 
Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 36(3), 57–68. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.trf.2015.11.001
Wu, T., Sachdeva, E., Akash, K., Wu, X., Misu, T., & Ortiz, J. (2022). 
Toward an adaptive situational awareness support system for 
urban driving. In 2022 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium 
(IV) (pp. 1073–1080). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/IV51971.2022. 
9827205
Yue, L., Abdel-Aty, M., Wu, Y., Ugan, J., & Yuan, C. (2021). Effects of 
forward collision warning technology in different pre-crash scenarios. 
Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 76, 
336–352. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2020.12.004
Zhang, Y., Li, X., Yan, X., & Xue, Q. (2015). Effects of collision warn­
ing system under different warning timing on driving speed and dis­
tance. 
In 
2015 
International 
Conference 
on 
Transportation 
Information and Safety (ICTIS) (pp. 380–385). IEEE. https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/ictis.2015.7232174
Zhao, W., Gong, S., Zhao, D., Liu, F., Sze, N. N., & Huang, H. (2023). 
Effects of collision warning characteristics on driving behaviors and 
safety in connected vehicle environments. Accident; Analysis and 
Prevention, 186(6), 107053. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2023.107053
Zhu, C., Brown, C. T., Bahar, D., Ye, X., Sohrabi, S., & Potts, I. (2023). 
Investigation on the driver-victim pairs in pedestrian and bicyclist 
crashes by latent class clustering and random forest algorithm. 
Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 182, 106964. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.aap.2023.106964
About the authors
Wanting Chen is a graduate student at the Department of Psychology, 
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University. Her research interests include traffic 
safety, augmented reality, and human–computer interaction.
Liuqiucheng Niu is a graduate student at the Department of 
Psychology, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University. Her research interests 
include user experience and human–computer interaction.
Shan Liu is a graduate student at the Department of Psychology, 
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University. Her research interests include ergonom­
ics and human–computer interaction.
Shu Ma is a PhD researcher at the Department of Psychology, 
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University. Her research interests include human– 
computer interaction, traffic safety, and automated driving.
Hongting Li is a professor at the Department of Psychology, Zhejiang 
University of Technology. His research interests include human–com­
puter interaction, ergonomics, user experience, augmented reality, and 
virtual reality.
Zhen Yang is an assistant professor at the Department of Psychology, 
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University. His research interests include human– 
computer interaction, human factors, user experience, cognitive sci­
ence, and neuroeconomics.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
15
