--- Page 1 ---
 
 
1
 
Abstract— Emergency Services’ (ES) vehicles primary 
objective is to attend an accident or other incident scenes in a fast, 
safe and efficient manner. Yet this task is becoming increasingly 
difficult due to the increasing population and the plethora of 
emergency cases. These factors affect directly the traffic both 
within the urban and the rural environment, increasing 
dramatically the “time to arrive” at the point of interest. 
Numerous Head-Down Display (HDD) systems have populated 
the dashboard area of the ES vehicles in order to tackle this issue, 
with limited success. To this end, the development of emerging 
technologies in both computing and telecommunications have 
enabled modern vehicular systems to assist drivers in their 
decision-making process. Head-Up Displays (HUD) present a 
combinatory approach of the aforementioned technologies, which 
present crucial information to the driver through Augmented 
Reality (AR) projection. In order to develop a design and 
development framework for the utilisation of AR and HUD 
technology, this paper presents the results of 50 drivers 
investigation related to their activities during immobile or 
slow-moving traffic which results in driver’s distraction and 
inability to respond to the incoming ES vehicles. In turn, the 
paper discusses these results and offers an overview of the 
Human-Machine Interface requirements for a prototype HUD 
aiming to assist the safety, speed and manoeuvrability of the ES 
vehicles. 
 
Keywords— Emergency Response Vehicles, Head-Up Display, 
Collision Avoidance, Augmented Reality, Driver Distraction, 
Driving Simulator  
I. INTRODUCTION 
Emergency Services (ES), entailing ambulance, police and 
fire brigade services, play a vital role in ensuring that citizens 
in-need receive support and treatment efficiently and in a 
timely manner [1,2]. The latter though could be greatly affected 
by a number of variables hindering the speed of support 
provided by the ES vehicles. On a number of occasions, 
journeys expected to take eight minutes or less were extended 
up to three hours before ES staff could attend the incidents [3]. 
In some parts of the world, the deplorable condition of the roads 
makes it almost impossible for ES to gain access to, or transport 
the patients [3]. Navigation through traffic can be a major 
problem for ES drivers. In their effort to counteract the traffic 
and road conditions, ambulance drivers face a great risk of 
collision, not only from on-coming traffic, since they are 
sometimes required to drive in the opposite lane when there is 
stagnant traffic, but also collision into inattentive vehicles and 
pedestrians, especially in not so favourable weather conditions. 
Taking the aforementioned into account, being able to 
perform such important tasks within such a short time span, will 
require a great amount of speed and precision on the part of ES 
personnel. Emergency vehicles’ response speed is crucial to 
clinical outcomes in serious cases. The successful patient 
transfer is directly related to the speed that the rescue vehicle 
can achieve through the traffic flow, particularly in traffic 
congestion bottlenecks [4].  
This paper identifies the major issues related to ES vehicles’ 
delays and collisions and offers a framework for an alternative 
solution that aims to enhance ES drivers’ human responses in 
high speed and when manoeuvring through traffic. 
 In order to inform the proposed system design, this work 
investigates the questionnaire responses of 50 drivers related to 
their activities during immobile or slow-moving traffic which 
results in driver’s distraction and inability to respond to the 
incoming ES vehicles. Their responses, in turn, inform the 
design requirements of the proposed system which employs an 
Augmented Reality (AR) Head-Up Display (HUD). The latter 
assumes interface design mantra and methodology from our 
previous HUD interfaces designed for navigation and collision 
avoidance purposes [5, 6 & 7].  
The following section presents the current ES navigation 
issues.  The succeeding section investigates the drivers’ failure 
to maintain spatial and situational awareness in slow or 
immobile traffic which hinders the ES vehicles manoeuvring 
through the traffic. The third section discusses the system 
design requirements, challenges and proposed solutions. 
Finally, the paper concludes with a succinct review of the 
potential design considerations based on the feedback from 50 
drivers’ informing the future development of the interface 
components for the ES HUD. 
K.F. BRAM-LARBI1, V. CHARISSIS1, S. KHAN1, R. LAGOO1, D. K. HARRISON1 and D. DRIKAKIS2 
 
1Glasgow Caledonian University, Glasgow, UK 
School of Computing, Engineering and Built Environment 
 
2University of Nicosia, Nicosia, Cyprus 
School of Sciences and Engineering 
Collision Avoidance Head-Up Display: Design Considerations 
for Emergency Services’ Vehicles 
	
	
			
	

 !"
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on August 26,2020 at 15:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 2 ---
 
 
2
II. CURRENT ES NAVIGATION ISSUES 
Contemporary navigation systems promise to improve 
driving performance by presenting an optimal route with 
respect to reducing travel time and or improving fuel 
consumption. Hence, they function solely as route calculation 
machines which affect the singular aspect of the driving 
experience, namely spatial orientation [6, 7]. Such systems, 
however, do not support or improve drivers' spatial and 
situational awareness, that is primarily responsible for most 
collisions [5, 6, 8]. The current navigation issues for ES 
vehicles’ navigation issues discussed within this paper can be 
attributed to the following factors.  
A. Siren Localisation Issues 
Sound can be the first warning perceivable by human senses 
of events that are taking place beyond the human field of view. 
Unlike vision, which can be obscured by buildings and other 
objects, the sound is perceptible from multiple directions.  
Thus, auditory information is vital for situation awareness on 
the roads, both as complementary and supplementary to vision 
[4].  Consequently, audible warning systems are integral to 
emergency vehicles to allow them to be located by other 
motorists and pedestrians [7,8].  
However, hearing a sound does not always provide enough 
information to determine the exact direction from which this 
sound occurred or is occurring, especially when this sound is in 
constant disarray of high pitch volume.  
Notably, ES sirens typically employ a sweeping pattern with 
most of the sound energy located in the region of 500 Hz to 
1500 Hz as depicted in Figure 1 [9].   
Yet, it has been documented that the localisation 
characteristics of existing siren patterns combined with high 
levels of background noise can significantly affect the average 
driver’s ability to accurately define the position and heading 
direction of the incoming emergency vehicle [4, 9]. Evidently, 
the human inability to accurately locate the direction of an 
approaching emergency vehicle is directly linked to the siren 
patterns themselves [10, 11]. This spatial misjudgement 
contributes to multiple fatalities and casualties according to the 
British road accident statistics [12]. A previous investigation 
into audible warning systems showed that sirens were used 
86% of the time by ES vehicles when on call, but this was not 
always in unison with warning lights [13]. In this survey that 
examined public reactions to the audible warning, the results 
showed that nearly one-third of drivers failed to detect the 
approaching emergency vehicle until it was less than 50m 
away. Interestingly, 25% of the participants were completely 
unable to hear the audible warning systems on the approach of 
the emergency vehicle. These figures reinforce the limited 
effectiveness of current emergency vehicle audible warning 
systems [11, 13].  Aiming to mitigate this issue, previous 
studies have explored the current possibilities regarding the 
types of technology used to avert collisions on the part of the 
emergency response services [5,6].  In relation to the ES 
drivers, even with the intervention of RDS (Radio Data 
System), which also help in traffic situations, collision 
avoidance is still a prominent issue. 
B. Driver Distraction  
The drivers’ inability to locate the sound source on multiple 
occasions is not only an issue of sound propagation.  A number 
of other reasons could be contributory as presented below: 
 Driver’s age – Older drivers have naturally dampened senses 
which affect their spatial and situational awareness.  
 Infotainment Distraction -   One of the most common issues 
is driver distraction due to the vehicular infotainment 
systems. The latter is typically providing a plethora of 
information based on mobile phone communication, 
navigation, music, various applications in the form of 
social media and the full access to internet resources. The 
aforementioned infotainment resources have a detrimental 
impact on the driver’s cognitive load and as a result, reduce 
dramatically the spatial and situational awareness [14].  
 Passengers’ Distraction - Similarly, the driver could be 
distracted by the passengers as it was observed by previous 
studies [15, 16].  
 Vehicle’s sound system - In addition, the loud volume of the 
vehicle’s sound system could render the driver effectively 
deaf to any external sounds.  
 Vehicle’s soundproofing – The above cases could be further 
amplified by the soundproofing of modern vehicles which 
aim to enclose the vehicle occupants in a relaxing space 
detached from the external traffic noises.  
Previous studies conducted on driver’s performance utilised 
various analysis methods and metrics to identify the driver 
 
 
Fig. 1. Typical sweeping siren pattern as described by Moore et al. 2011 [9]. 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on August 26,2020 at 15:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 3 ---
 
 
3
distraction issues. Eye fixation was one of the major measuring 
systems aiming to define the mental workload involved in 
different collision prone scenarios [17]. Similar studies 
investigating the human position and posture during driving 
demonstrate seven tasks related to safe, dangerous and 
distracted driving patterns [18].  Driver’s performance and 
assessment of distraction have also been investigated through 
the analysis of rapid variations in vehicle dynamics and the 
manoeuvring patterns [19]. Notably, all the aforementioned 
studies, whilst utilising diverse driver performance analysis 
methods, converge to the same point, namely, that secondary 
tasks could decrease significantly driving performance. 
Consequently, this issue multiplies in the case of ES drivers that 
have to drive in a fast and timely fashion whilst receiving 
incoming updates for emergencies through various information 
systems. 
C. ES Vehicles’ Head-Down Displays (HDD) 
Some of the aforementioned driver distractions tend to affect 
also the ES vehicle drivers. In their case, the information 
provided by multiple conduits regarding navigation, traffic and 
accident scene data could increase significantly the cognitive 
load. The attention to the traffic conditions could further 
deteriorate as the focus of the ES driver is to maintain a 
multi-fold approach ensuring the safety of the ES vehicle 
occupants (i.e. ES personnel and patients in ambulance cases), 
identify optimal manoeuvring through traffic, maintain an 
acceptable high speed and circumvent obstacles whilst ensuring 
the safety of the neighbouring civilian vehicles.  
However, this on-road unilaterally biased focus is plagued 
with many in-vehicle distractions. Current technological 
advancement and ES requirements tend to over-populate the 
in-vehicle space in close proximity to the driver, which 
accommodates the vehicles’ infotainment system and provides 
multiple attention-seeking visual and auditory data [6, 16]. 
Notably, the majority of the information-provision is presented 
to the driver through devices located at the dashboard, below 
the driver’s field of view namely Head-Down Displays (HDD) 
depicted in Figure 2. Evidently, these mind-sharing 
notifications could affect the driver’s attention, discerning the 
challenging road-traffic flow [5, 7]. In turn, the HDD interfaces 
aiming to support the speed and safety of the ES vehicles may 
not effectively provide critical information any more as the 
driver’s attention may be divided to several irrelevant 
information outlets [5, 20]. Therefore, in a typical accident 
scenario in which the lead vehicles brake abruptly, the driver 
does not have the required time and situational awareness to 
proceed in a collision-avoidance braking manoeuvre [6, 7]. 
D. High Speed and Manoeuvring 
In many countries, ambulances are granted several 
exceptions to road traffic laws aiming to provide them with 
ample choices under stressful and demanding traffic 
conditions. As such, no statutory provision imposing a speed 
limit, or traffic flow limits apply to ES vehicles [21]. 
Nonetheless, the selective suspension of particular road traffic 
laws have limited impact on the actual speed and manoeuvring 
efficiency of the ES vehicles as the decision making process is 
primarily provided by the emergency vehicle driver taking into 
account the relations among speed, collision risk and the need 
for a fast response [22]. Regardless of the rigorous training of 
the ES drivers, the multiple variables occurring during 
high-speed manoeuvring amplify the role of human factors. Yet 
the decision-making process of the ES drivers is constantly 
redefined based on the neighbouring vehicles’ drivers activities 
and their ability to respond accordingly to the situation. Speed, 
although an important factor in the time-sensitive ES response 
time, is not the main factor that defines the successful arrival to 
the accident scene [22]. Spasmodic peaks of high-speed 
between traffic gaps could increase the probability of collisions 
[6, 10, 23]. Previous work observed that maintaining a constant 
flow through different driving conditions in medium speed and 
informing the driver in advance regarding potential traffic 
issues, could improve both the safety and the time of arrival to 
the required destination [5]. Thus, maintaining the flow and 
speed momentum could be a challenge in a real-life, 
non-deterministic road-traffic. In this case, additional support 
and provision of information could be employed in a timely 
manner and with minimal cognitive load requirements to the 
driver through a combinatory approach of AI / HUD [24-26].  
E. Non-Deterministic Traffic Flow  
In contemporary urban and rural environment, traffic 
congestion has increased exponentially in the last few decades. 
Traffic congestion, defined as a performance of traffic flow 
 

 
Fig. 2. ES vehicle cabin offering multiple information-provision conduits. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on August 26,2020 at 15:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 4 ---
 
 
4
instability, manifested through ease and inhibition of traffic 
congestion are equivalent to reducing traffic flow instability. 
Traffic flow includes many aspects such as road traffic flow, 
network traffic flow, vehicle traffic flow and the pedestrian 
traffic flow among others. The modern road vehicle traffic flow 
models can be categorised into macroscopic, mesoscopic and 
microscopic traffic flow models all with different benefits and 
drawbacks. In particular, the microscopic traffic flow model 
investigates the characteristics of the traffic flow by dealing 
with traffic flow as dispersed particles and studying the effect 
of single vehicles on the following vehicles. Its advantages are 
that it can analyse the transitions and the separation of the 
traffic flow phase and describe various traffic waves, which is a 
major issue for the ES vehicles [27-29]. 
III. ES VEHICLE DRIVERS  
A preliminary consultation with a focus group of 5 ES 
vehicle drivers offered an insight into the emergency vehicles’ 
traffic navigation issues. A number of new technologies such as 
Traffic Surveillance Technology, Mayday and Automatic 
Collision Notification Systems have improved this task. Yet 
other technologies currently available are not directly 
applicable such as Dynamic (Changeable) Message Signs, due 
to variations of the road-infrastructure capabilities. However, 
the civilian drivers’ reduced attendance to the rapidly changing 
traffic conditions was highlighted as the most impactful on the 
safety and speed operation of the ERS vehicles. Consequently, 
this influences the time-bound limitations in which the ES 
personnel is required to reach an accident and emergency 
scene. These suggestions were in accordance with the previous 
studies related to the distance that could be covered by ES in a 
given time frame [4, 9].  
To this end, a proposed solution which will entail the 
provision of real-time manoeuvring options (AI) directly 
presented on the real-life scene (HUD) was considered ideal by 
the ES focus group. In order to determine the exact operation 
and interface design of such a system, it was deemed essential 
to identify also the civilian drivers’ needs and behaviour whilst 
populating traffic congestion and identify the reasons behind 
their decision-making process or their inability to respond to 
external stimuli.  
IV. DRIVERS’ ATTENTION AND TRAFFIC ISSUES 
The majority of the aforementioned issues that have a 
negative impact on the timely and safe provision of ES is due to 
the human factors involved.  Adhering to the above, this work 
aims to identify not only the ES drivers’ current navigation 
issues but also the civilian drivers’ response capability and time 
to an incoming ES vehicle. The latter delayed response times 
disrupt the speed and manoeuvring of the ES vehicles.  
A. Questionnaire Design 
The drivers’ feedback and requirements were gathered using 
at this stage primarily qualitative data analysis and grounded 
theory-based research study [30]. The questionnaire entailed 25 
questions and was formed in two parts.  
The first part gathered drivers’ demographic information as 
well as the number of miles driven annually, type of 
road-network mostly used and frequency of encounters with 
ERS vehicles that need priority on the road. The second part of 
the questionnaire (20 questions) was designed to retrieve the 
drivers’ responses regarding their driving behaviour and habits 
in slow-moving or immobile traffic conditions. The interest on 
the latter is that the drivers tend to occupy themselves with 
numerous infotainment systems and applications either 
following a steady, dense, traffic flow or waiting for the traffic 
gridlock resolution. Consequently, the drivers’ can be 
distracted 
from 
the 
surrounding 
environment 
and 
unintentionally disregard both the siren and the lights from 
approaching ES vehicles [6].   
B. Participants 
The investigation was performed with the use of 50 
participants (40 male and 10 female), which all held a valid 
British driving licence. The participants’ age was from 18 to 60 
years old.   
V. STUDY RESULTS 
The results derived from 18 selected questions targeting the 
drivers’ behavioural issues that hinder current ES and could 
pose a danger to the overall traffic flow are presented below.  

 
Fig. 3. How often do you engage in the following while driving? Responses to 
questions 1-9. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on August 26,2020 at 15:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 5 ---
 
 
5
In particular, 34% of the 50 drivers admitted that they send 
messages (very frequently, often, sometimes) whilst driving as 
illustrated in Figure 3. An alarming 60% of the drivers 
responded that they read mobile phone text messages while 
driving.  
Adhering to previous studies related to mobile phone calls 
and texting, the driver's attention is fully diminished during 
these tasks which typically result in collision accidents [6, 31]. 
In addition, the drivers’ response to the usage of navigation 
systems is 76% whilst internet usage whilst driving was 40%. 
Smaller percentages were encountered in reading/writing notes 
(16%) and checklists (8%).  
The drivers that responded to those questions were using 
driving as part of their work such as construction workers and 
parcel delivery staff which are an increasing group of users due 
to the emerging Gig economy globally [32].  
Calendar and daily events’ information received 12% of 
interaction (sometimes).  
Music, as expected, received the highest percentage of 
interaction during driving with 90%, which on a number of 
cases, relates also to the inability of the driver to hear the 
incoming ES vehicles.  Thus, the selection process of music 
through various devices could absorb completely driver’s 
attention from the external environment [6].  
Making and Receiving audio calls appeared to score also 
highly on drivers’ secondary activities within the vehicle with 
75% and 80% respectively as presented in Figure 4.  
In contrast, the Making and Receiving video calls had limited 
driver attention with 6% and 5% respectively. News’ updates 
were also in moderate scale with 20%. The upcoming trend 
though appears with Social Networks with  40% responding 
that they use, which reflects the current tendency of a number 
of automotive manufacturers to include these applications in 
the main dashboard- touchscreen menu.  
VI. AR HUD DESIGN FRAMEWORK 
The aforementioned results highlighted the necessity of a 
system that could accommodate current ES requirements whilst 
predicting neighbouring vehicles actions.  
A. It is evident that the typical siren and flashing lights are 
inefficient for a growing segment of drivers’ population. These 
typical warning methods could be improved and complemented 
by an Emergency Vehicle to Civilian Vehicle (EV to CV) 
warning 
which 
could 
disrupt/pause 
any 
infotainment 
broadcasting and application in close proximity to the incoming 
ERS vehicle. Previous studies investigated the options of RDS 
yet due to the new technologies embedded on the current 
vehicles a more holistic approach is required in order to cover 
the majority of the current infotainment systems [4]. 
B. Additionally, an AI system will require training on 
different traffic scenarios and driver responses in order to 
provide relevant suggestions and alternatives to the ES driver. 
C. A full-windshield HUD interface could provide 
real-time AR visualisation of the proposed AI routes, 
supporting further the driver’s decision- making process [7, 33, 
34]. An early prototype HUD based on the information 
provided by both ES and civilian vehicles’ drivers is illustrated 
in Figure 5. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper presented the main results of a 50 user 
investigation regarding their driving behaviours whilst in 
slow-moving or immobile traffic congestion. In turn, the 
drivers' behaviours tendencies informed the design framework 
 
 
Fig. 4. How often do you engage in the following while driving? Responses 
to questions 10-18. 

 
Fig. 5. Screenshot of HUD prototype testing in the Virtual Reality Driving 
Simulator Laboratory.  
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on August 26,2020 at 15:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 6 ---
 
 
6
for the development of a prototype AR - HUD interface for the  
ES vehicle drivers.  
The latter will be designed to provide alternative navigation 
options and manoeuvring possibilities superimposed on the 
external environment as a full-windshield AR projection. in 
real-time for the  ERS vehicle drivers.  
In future work, this project aims to finalise the design and 
interactivity of the proposed HUD interface based on the latest 
subjective feedback. Finally, the consumer-ready HUD system 
will be evaluated by the ERS drivers in order to identify the 
system efficiency. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Smith, “A National Perspective on Ambulance Crashes and Safety: 
Guidance from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration on 
ambulance safety for patients and providers”, NHTSA Report, EMS 
World, pp. 91-94, 2015. 
[2] Y. Moroi and K. Takami, “A method of securing priority-use routes for 
emergency 
vehicles 
using 
inter-vehicle 
and 
vehicle-road 
communication”, IEEE 7th International Conference on New 
Technologies, Mobility and Security (NTMS), 2015. 
[3] Osei-Ampofo, Oduro, Oteng, Donkor, Zakariah, & Jacquet, “The 
Evolution and Current State of Emergency Care in Ghana. African 
Journal of Emergency Medicine, pp 52 – 58, 2013. 
[4] S. Boslem, J. D. Moore and V. Charissis, “ Investigating the Improvement 
of the Localisation Propensity and Impact of the Emergency Vehicle 
Sirens”, in Proceedings of the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) 
World Congress 2011, 12-14 April, Detroit, Michigan, USA, 2011. 
[5] V. Charissis, S. Papanastasiou, W. Chan, and E. Peytchev, “Evolution of 
a full-windshield HUD designed for current VANET communication 
standards”, IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems International 
Conference (IEEE ITS), The Hague, Netherlands, pp. 1637-1643, DOI: 
10.1109/ITSC.2013.6728464, 2013. 
[6] R. Lagoo, V. Charissis, W. Chan, S. Khan and D. Harrison, “Prototype 
gesture recognition interface for vehicular Head-Up Display system”, 
IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics, Las Vegas, 
USA, pp.1-6, Jan. 2018. 
[7] V. Charissis, and S. Papanastasiou, “Human-Machine Collaboration 
Through Vehicle Head-Up Display Interface”, in International Journal of 
Cognition, Technology and Work, P. C. Cacciabue and E. Hollangel 
(eds.) Springer London Ltd Volume 12, Number 1, pp 41-50, DOI: 
10.1007/s10111-008-0117, 2010. 
[8] G. Weinberg, B. Harsham, and Z. Medenica, “Evaluating the usability of 
a head-up display for selection from choice lists in cars”, 3rd International 
Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular 
Applications, Automotive UI ’11, pp. 39–46, ACM, 2011. 
[9] J. D. Moore, S. Boslem, and V. Charissis, “Optimisation of Sound 
Localisation for Emergency Vehicle Sirens through Prototype Audio 
System”, Book title: Design, User Experience, and Usability. Theory, 
Methods, Tools and Practice, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, J. A., 
Jacko (Ed), Vol. 6770, ISBN 978-3-642-21707-4, pp 177-186, Springer 
Berlin / Heidelberg, 2011.  
[10] E. M. Wenzel, M. Arruda, D. J. Kistler, and F. L. Wightman,  
“Localisation using non-individualised head-related transfer functions”, 
Journal of the acoustic society of America, Vol. 94, pp. 111-123, 1993. 
[11] C. Ho and C. Spence,  “Assessing the effectiveness of various auditory 
cues in capturing a driver’s visual attention”, Journal of experimental 
psychology: Applied, vol. 11, pp. 157-174, 2005. 
[12] A. Dhani and D. Robineau, “Reported road casualties in Great Britain: 
quarterly provisional estimates year ending June 2018”, Department of 
Transport, UK, 2018. 
[13] G. Saunders and A. Gough, “Emergency Ambulances on the Public 
Highway Linked with Inconvenience and Potential Danger to Road 
Users”, Emergency Medical Journal, Vol 20, pp 277-280, 2003. 
[14] R. Lagoo, V. Charissis and D. Harrison (2019), Mitigating Driver’s 
Distraction with the use of Augmented Reality Head-Up Display and 
Gesture Recognition system, in IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine 
(CEM) 
Journal, 
Vol. 
8, 
Issue: 
5, 
 
pp.79-85, 
DOI: 
10.1109/MCE.2019.2923896. 
[15] S. Wang, V. Charissis, R. Lagoo, J. Campbell, and D. K. Harrison, 
“Reducing Driver Distraction by Utilising Augmented Reality Head-Up 
Display System for Rear Passengers”, IEEE International Conference on 
Consumer Electronics (IEEE ICCE), Las Vegas, USA, pp 1-6, DOI: 
10.1109/ICCE.2019.8661927, 2019. 
[16] S. Wang, V. Charissis, and D. Harrison, “Augmented Reality Prototype 
HUD for Passenger Infotainment in a Vehicular Environment”, in 
Advances in Science, Technology and Engineering Systems Journal, Vol. 
2, No. 3, 634-641  2017. 
[17] Y. Liao, G. Li, S. Eben, B. Cheng, and P Green, “Understanding Driver 
Response Patterns to Mental Workload Increase in Typical Driving 
Scenarios”, in IEEE Access, vol 6, pp. 35890-35900, 2018. 
[18] Y. Xing, Chen L, Z. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Na, D. Cao, E. Velenis, and F.Y. 
Wang, “Identification and Analysis of Driver Postures for In-Vehicle 
Driving 
Activities 
and 
Secondary 
Tasks 
Recognition”, 
IEEE 
Transactions on Computational Social Systems,vol5, no 1, pp. 95-108, 
2018. 
[19] J. H.L. Hansen, C. Busso, Y. Zheng and A. Sathyanarayana, “Driver 
Modeling for Detection and Assessment of Distraction: Examples from 
the UTDrive Test Bed”, IEEE Signal Process Magazine,vol34, no 4,  
pp.130-142, 2017. 
[20] H. Hsiao, J. Chang and P. Simeonov, “Preventing Emergency Vehicle 
Crashes: Status and Challenges of Human Factors Issues”, Sage,  Vol. 60 
no. 7, pp. 1048-1072 https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720818786132, 2018. 
[21] Fire (Scotland) Act 2005 - Scottish Parliament Bill, Legislation.gov.uk, 
2005 
[22] P. Albertsson and A. Sundström, "Evaluation of Insight Training of 
Ambulance Drivers in Sweden Using DART, a New E-learning Tool", 
Traffic Injury Prevention, pp. 621-629, ISSN: 1538-9588, 2011. 
[23] S.S. Lam, F. N. Nguyen, Y.Y. Ng, V.P. Lee, T.H. Wong, S.M. 
Fook-Chong and M.E. Ong, “Factors affecting the ambulance response 
times of trauma incidents in Singapore”, Accident; analysis and 
prevention, vol. 82, DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2015.05.007, 2015. 
[24] J. L. Gabbard, M. G. Fitch, K. Hyungil, “Behind the Glass: Driver 
Challenges and Opportunities for AR Automotive Applications”, 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
IEEE, 
Vol. 
102:2, 
pp.124-136, 
DOI: 
10.1109/JPROC.2013.2294642, 2014. 
[25] S.Wang, V.Charissis, J. Campbell, W.Chan, D. Moore and D.Harrison, 
“An investigation into the use of Virtual Reality technology for passenger 
infotainment in a vehicular environment, in International Conference on 
Advanced Materials for Science and Engineering (IEEE - ICAMSE), pp 
404 - 407, DOI: 10.1109/ICAMSE.2016.7840359, Beijing, China, 2016. 
[26] H. Okumura, A. Hotta, T. Sasaki, K. Horiuchi, N. Okada,  “Wide field of 
view optical combiner for augmented reality head-up displays, 2018 
IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics (IEEE ICCE), 
2018. 
[27] Y. Zeng, and N. Zhang, “Review and New Insights of the Traffic Flow 
Lattice Model for Road Vehicle Traffic Flow.” Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers Inc., pp. 100–103, 2015. 
[28] I. Prigogine,  R. Herman, R, and R.S. Schechter, “Kinetic Theory of 
Vehicular Traffic.” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 
Apr, pp. 295–295, 1972. 
[29] M. L. L. Ianninia and R. Dickmanb, “Kinetic Theory of Vehicular 
Traffic”, American Journal of Physics, Vol. 84, no. 135,  
[30] B. G. Glaser and A. L. Strauss, “Discovery of Grounded Theory”, New 
York: Routledge, https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203793206, 1999. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on August 26,2020 at 15:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 7 ---
 
 
7
[31] S.M. Simons, A. Hicks, J. K. Caird, “Safety-critical event risk associated 
with cell phone tasks as measured in naturalistic driving studies: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis”, Accident Analysis and Prevention 
Journal, Elsevier, Vol 87, pp 161-169, 2016. 
[32] A. Gandhi, A. N. Hidayanto, Y. G. Sucahyo and Y. Ruldeviyani,  
“Exploring People’s Intention to Become Platform-based Gig Workers: 
An Empirical Qualitative Study”, IEEE 2018 International Conference on 
Information Technology Systems and Innovation (ICITSI), 2018. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[33] H. Okumura, T. Sasaki, A. Hotta, and K. Shinohara, “Monocular 
hyperrealistic virtual and augmented reality display” 2014 IEEE Fourth 
International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE-Berlin), 
Berlin, Germany, pp.19 – 23, 2014  
[34] H. Okumura, T. Sasaki,  A. Hotta, A. Moriya, N. Okada and O. Nagahara,  
“Hyperrealistic head-up-display for automotive application”, 2011 IEEE 
International Conference on Consumer Electronics (IEEE ICCE), 2011.  
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on August 26,2020 at 15:52:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
