--- Page 1 ---
International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction
ISSN: 1044-7318 (Print) 1532-7590 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/hihc20
Improving Pedestrian Safety with Head-Up
Display Warning in a Connected Environment
Yu Zhang, Yang Bian, Xiaohua Zhao, Xuewei Li & Jianhua Zhang
To cite this article: Yu Zhang, Yang Bian, Xiaohua Zhao, Xuewei Li & Jianhua Zhang
(2025) Improving Pedestrian Safety with Head-Up Display Warning in a Connected
Environment, International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 41:6, 3724-3744, DOI:
10.1080/10447318.2024.2368910
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2024.2368910
Published online: 17 Sep 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 292
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hihc20

--- Page 2 ---
Improving Pedestrian Safety with Head-Up Display Warning in a Connected 
Environment
Yu Zhang, Yang Bian, Xiaohua Zhao, Xuewei Li, and Jianhua Zhang 
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Engineering, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper, the potential of using a head-up display (HUD) in the connected environment to 
improve a vehicle’s running comfort and pedestrian safety is tested, by providing warning infor­
mation to drivers in advance. To achieve this objective, driving simulation technology is used to 
construct the connected environment and develop the HUD, and the effectiveness of the system 
is then tested. Specifically, thirty-four participants were recruited to conduct driving simulation 
experiments in six scenarios: three warning display types (Baseline/Head-down display/Head-up 
display) combined with two weather conditions (clear weather/foggy weather). The effects of the 
three different warning display types on braking risk-avoidance strategy were studied by compar­
ing the drivers’ performance during the perception and decision stage (position of accelerator- 
pedal release, position of first braking), the risk-avoidance manipulation stage (maximum deceler­
ation, braking distance) and the risk-avoidance result stage (minimum collision distance, position 
of minimum speed). The influences of weather conditions and driver attributes were also consid­
ered. When the HUD warnings were activated, drivers started to decelerate further away from 
pedestrians, with a more stable and moderate deceleration process and a greater safety margin 
between the vehicle and the pedestrians. Using HUD warnings in foggy conditions improved driv­
ers’ perception and decision abilities, this study confirmed the great benefits that HUD warnings 
in the connected environment can bring to traffic safety, especially under risky situations and 
inclement weathers. The research results provide a reference for the more humanized and ration­
alized optimization design of these warning systems.
KEYWORDS 
Connected environment; 
head-up display warning; 
risk avoidance strategy; 
pedestrian safety; 
generalized linear mixed 
model   
1. Introduction
A connected environment collects information related to 
surrounding traffic by means of vehicle-to-vehicle(V2V), 
vehicle-to-infrastructure(V2I), 
and 
vehicle-to-everything 
(V2X) communications (Ali et al., 2020; Maag et al., 2022). 
Such information, in the form of in-vehicle warnings, is 
expected to improve drivers’ situational awareness of sur­
rounding traffic during driving, such as potentially danger­
ous vehicles and pedestrians (Aust et al., 2013; Cicchino, 
2017). As a traditional human-computer interaction inter­
face, head-down display (HDD) is installed on the dash­
board or control panel of vehicles, requiring drivers to lower 
their heads to obtain information (Liu & Wen, 2004). In 
contrast, head-up display (HUD) projects the required infor­
mation directly into the drivers’ line of vision, reducing eye 
adjustment time and the possibility of ignoring dangerous 
stimuli on the road (Ablaßmeier et al., 2007; Liu, 2003). It is 
reasonable to expect that HUD warning system in the con­
nected environment has great potential to improve driving 
behavior.
In recent years, pedestrian safety has received extensive 
attention due to its high accident rate and mortality. A 
report in the United States mentioned that it is estimated 
that 6,590 pedestrians died in motor vehicle accidents in 
2019, based on the preliminary data on pedestrian traffic 
deaths in all fifty states and the District of Columbia 
(Retting & GHSA, 2020). In pedestrian and motor vehicle 
accidents, pedestrian crossing is the main source of risk. 
Pedestrian crossing refers to the behavior of pedestrians 
crossing roads (Wu et al., 2013), where pedestrian crossing 
locations that may conflict with motor vehicles typically 
include zebra crossings at intersections, zebra crossings on 
roads, and roads outside the zebra crossing. Among them, 
pedestrian crossing events outside the zebra crossing pose a 
higher risk and are also one of the most common emergen­
cies. According to statistical data from Italy in 2020 (ACI- 
ISTAT, 2017), 7,204 (3.2%) road accidents were caused by 
pedestrians’ inappropriate behavior when crossing the road 
outside the crosswalk. Therefore, pedestrian crossing events 
outside the zebra crossing are one of the most important 
challenges facing road safety and the focus of this article.
The HUD warning system in the connected environment 
seems to have brought new possibilities to address pedes­
trian safety issues. Limited research has shown that com­
pared to no warning or HDD warning, the HUD warning 
increases the likelihood that drivers would glance toward 
latent the pedestrian (Hajiseyedjavadi et al., 2018), shortens 
CONTACT Xiaohua Zhao 
zhaoxiaohua@bjut.edu.cn 
Beijing Key Laboratory of Traffic Engineering, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China 
ß 2024 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 
2025, VOL. 41, NO. 6, 3724–3744 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2024.2368910 

--- Page 3 ---
braking response time (Winkler et al., 2018b), and increases 
safety margins with pedestrians (Naujoks & Neukum, 2014). 
By reviewing previous research, it has been found that the 
influence of HUD warning systems on driving behavior has 
been preliminarily explored, while the impact of HUD warn­
ing systems on driver risk avoidance strategies still needs 
further exploration. Risk avoidance strategies can reflect the 
driving behavior of drivers in various stages such as percep­
tion, judgment, decision, and manipulation during the risk 
avoidance process, as well as the final risk avoidance results 
(Yue et al., 2020). The optimal risk avoidance strategy can 
improve the stability of the risk avoidance process while 
ensuring safety. Therefore, before the large-scale application 
of HUD, it is necessary to fully explore how the HUD warn­
ing system affects drivers’ risk avoidance strategies and 
whether it can help drivers choose the optimal risk avoid­
ance strategy.
In fact, the effectiveness of the HUD warning system is 
also influenced by complex external conditions and driver 
attributes. Regarding the complex external environment, it 
includes weather conditions (e.g., foggy, rain and snow), lin­
ear road conditions (e.g., sharp curves and steep slopes) and 
light conditions (day and night). As a typical inclement wea­
ther with reduced visibility, foggy weather diminished the 
drivers’ visual distance and perception of the surrounding 
environment, which had a significant negative impact on 
driver behavior (Gao et al., 2020; Mueller & Trick, 2012). 
Previous studies have shown that HUD warning system in 
the connected environment can effectively avoid vehicle col­
lisions at intersections and rear-end collisions at sections 
under foggy conditions, helping drivers respond earlier and 
brake smoother (Wu et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2020). It is 
worth further exploring whether the HUD pedestrian warn­
ing system is equally effective in foggy weather. In addition, 
there are differences in the degree to which drivers with dif­
ferent attributes (e.g., gender, age and driving experience) 
benefit from the HUD warning system. Previous research 
has suggested that HUD warning systems may be more 
effective for inexperienced drivers (Li et al., 2020). When 
using the HUD driving assistance system, male and female 
drivers exhibit different horizontal and longitudinal driving 
behaviors (Lyu et al., 2019). Therefore, when exploring the 
impact of the HUD warning system on driver braking risk 
avoidance strategies, it is meaningful to consider its inter­
action with weather conditions or driver attributes.
This study aims to explore the comprehensive effective­
ness of HUD warning systems in avoiding pedestrian colli­
sions in the connected environment. Specifically, the effect 
of the HUD warning on drivers’ braking risk-avoidance 
strategy in the pedestrian crossing event outside the zebra 
crossing in the connected environment was explored 
through the driver recognition process in spatial dimension, 
considering the interaction of weather and driver attributes. 
To achieve this objective, an advanced driving simulator was 
used to build the connected environment and to test the 
effectiveness of the HUD warning on the pedestrian crossing 
event outside the zebra crossing under six scenarios of three 
warning display types (Baseline/HDD/HUD)  two weather 
conditions (clear weather/foggy weather). A comprehensive 
index system was constructed from the spatial dimension to 
reflect the entire process of braking risk-avoidance. Finally, 
the generalized linear mixed model was applied to prelimin­
arily explore the effects of warning display types, weather 
conditions, driver attributes (gender, driving experience, 
driving frequency) and their interaction factors on the brak­
ing risk-avoidance strategy, and deeply analyze the differen­
ces in the influence of different levels of the same factor on 
the braking risk-avoidance strategy. The proposed method 
can provide theoretical supports for the research of braking 
risk-avoidance strategy, and the results may provide the 
basis for the optimization and design of HUD warning sys­
tems in the connected environment.
2. Literature review
This section is divided into four subsections: 2.1 The overall 
development and application of HUD; 2.2 Application of 
HUD warning in avoiding pedestrian collisions; 2.3 Test 
tool for HUD warning utility; 2.4 A method of exploring 
multiple influencing factors.
2.1. The overall development and application of HUD
HUD was first applied in the aviation industry to assist 
pilots. Nowadays, HUD has been widely used in-vehicle 
information systems. It uses the principle of optical reflec­
tion to project driving-related information to the front of 
the driver’s line of sight, reducing the frequency of the driv­
er’s head lowering, improving information reading effi­
ciency, improving driving distraction and load, and 
effectively ensuring driving safety. As an in-vehicle informa­
tion system, HUD was initially used to display navigation 
information, vehicle status information, and entertainment 
communication information. With the development of con­
nected technology and the realization of V2X communica­
tion, HUD has been widely used to display safety assistance 
information, supporting various safety-critical scenarios such 
as vehicle collisions, bicycle collisions, obstacle collisions 
and pedestrian collisions (Winkler et al., 2018b; Z. Yang 
et al., 2019). However, when HUD provides information 
that is unreasonable or unclear, it may lead to driver distrac­
tion and misunderstanding, resulting in negative effects 
(Ahmed et al., 2020; Pfannm€uller et al., 2015; Z. Yang et al., 
2019). Therefore, developing a reasonable HUD warning 
system and testing its effectiveness in various safety-critical 
scenarios have become a focus of scholars’ current attention.
2.2. Application of HUD warning in avoiding pedestrian 
collisions
Pedestrians are considered one of the most vulnerable road 
users, with characteristics such as being difficult to observe 
and difficult to predict trajectories, leading to high accident 
and mortality rates. HUD warning systems have great poten­
tial in improving pedestrian safety through V2X technologies 
in the connected environment. Scholars have conducted 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
3725

--- Page 4 ---
research on the effectiveness of HUD warnings in pedestrian 
crossing events outside the zebra crossing (Table 1). The 
effectiveness of HUD is mainly quantitatively evaluated from 
visual performance, behavioral performance, and subjective 
performance. Behavioral performance is considered as direct 
and beneficial evidence for demonstrating the effectiveness of 
Table 1. Summary of relevant research on the application of HUD warning in avoiding pedestrian collisions.
Authors
Objective
Safety-critical events
Methods
Observed variables
Findings in pedestrian 
events
Liu and Wen, 
(2004)
Compare the difference 
of driving 
performance 
between HUD 
and HDD
‹ Vehicles interact with 
pedestrians on the road 
outside the zebra crossing
Driving simulation
‹ Brake reaction time
‹ Decreased brake 
reaction time
Naujoks and 
Neukum (2014)
Investigate the 
influence of the 
specificity and timing 
of warnings on 
drivers’ driving 
performance
‹ Vehicles interact with 
pedestrians on the road 
outside the zebra 
crossing； 
› Vehicles interact with 
left-turning vehicles at the 
intersection; 
fi Vehicles interact with 
cyclists at the intersection
Driving simulation
‹ Maximum brake 
pedal pressure; 
› Minimum Time-to- 
arrival
‹ Decreased maximum 
brake pedal pressure; 
› Increased 
Minimum Time-to- 
arrival
Winkler et al., 
(2015)
Investigate the 
influence of HUD 
warning on drivers’ 
gaze and driving 
Behavior
‹ Vehicles interact with 
pedestrians on the road 
outside the zebra crossing
Driving simulation
‹ Brake reaction time; 
› Maximum braking 
value; 
fi Number of 
collisions
‹ Decreased brake 
reaction time; 
› Increases 
maximum braking 
value
Hajiseyedjavadi 
et al. (2018)
Investigate the 
effectiveness of 
visual warnings on 
young drivers’ hazard 
anticipation and 
hazard mitigation 
abilities
‹ Vehicles interact with 
pedestrians on on roads 
with and outside zebra 
crossings; 
› Vehicles interact with 
vehicles on the road
Driving simulation
‹ Proportion of latent 
hazards anticipated; 
› Speed
‹ Increased the 
possibility of 
glancing at the 
potential pedestrian; 
› Reduced speed
Winkler et al. 
(2018a)
Investigate the 
effectiveness of HUD 
warnings under 
different safe-critical 
events
‹ Vehicles interact with 
pedestrians on the road 
outside the zebra crossing 
and at the intersection; 
› Vehicles interact with 
bicyclists on the road; 
fi Vehicles interact with 
the lead vehicle on the 
road ; 
fl Vehicles interact with 
obstacles on the road;
Driving simulation
‹ Brake reaction time; 
› Brake maximum; 
fi Collision frequency
‹ Decreased brake 
reaction time; 
› Increases 
maximum braking 
value
Winkler et al. 
(2018b)
Investigate the 
influence of multi- 
stage collision 
warning on drivers’ 
driving performance
‹ Vehicles interact with 
pedestrians on the road 
outside the zebra crossing 
and at the intersection; 
› Vehicles interact with 
bicyclists on the road; 
fi Vehicles interact with 
the lead vehicle on the 
road; 
fl Vehicles interact with 
obstacles on the road;
Driving simulation
‹ Brake reaction time; 
› Brake maximum; 
fi Collision frequency
‹ Decreased brake 
reaction time
Large et al. (2019)
Investigate the effect of 
urgency and 
modality of 
pedestrian alert 
warnings on driver 
acceptance and 
performance
‹ Vehicles interact with 
pedestrians on the road 
outside the zebra crossing
Driving simulation
‹ TTC (Gaze on 
Pedestrian); 
› TTC (Foot off 
Accelerator); 
fi TTC (Foot on 
Brake); 
fl Headway (Car 
Stopped)
‹ Increased TTC (Foot 
off Accelerator); 
› Increased TTC 
(Foot on Brake); 
fi Increased 
Headway (Car 
Stopped)
Ali, Sharma, et al. 
(2020)
Investigate the impact 
of the connected 
environment on 
driving behavior and 
safety
‹ Vehicles interact with 
pedestrians on the road 
with zebra crossings
Driving simulation
‹ TTC
‹ Increased TTC
Haque et al. 
(2021)
Investigate the impact 
of HUD warnings on 
latent and observable 
response time in the 
connected 
environment
‹ Vehicles interact with 
pedestrians on the road 
with zebra crossings
Driving simulation
‹ Latent response time 
; 
› Observable 
response time
‹ Increased latent 
response time; 
› Decreased 
observable response 
time
TTC is the abbreviation of time-to-collision.
3726
Y. ZHANG ET AL.

--- Page 5 ---
HUD and is currently the focus of scholars’ attention. 
According to the driver’s cognitive avoidance process, the 
perception and decision, manipulation, and risk-avoidance 
result are the three main aspects of behavioral performance 
(Dozza et al., 2020; Kudarauskas, 2007; W. Yang et al., 2019).
Perception and decision are the processes in which the 
driver recognizes the danger and makes a response. It is 
usually measured accelerator pedal release time and brake 
reaction time. Liu and Wen (2004) used driving simulation 
to explore the driving performance of HUD and HDD when 
completing different tasks. The results of ANOVA indicate 
that compared to HDD, HUD improves the driver’s 
response speed to pedestrians. Haque et al. (2021) divided 
the driver response stage into the latent response phase and 
the observable response phase and used driving simulation 
to explore the impact of the HUD warning accompanied by 
beeps on the two response stages in a connected environ­
ment under the pedestrian crossing event at zebra crossing. 
Through T-test, it was found that when providing HUD 
warnings to drivers, they had a longer latent response time 
and a shorter observable response time. Large et al. (2019) 
designed a driving simulation experiment and used the 
ANOVA method to study the impact of the urgency and 
modality of pedestrian warning on driving performance. The 
study found that providing earlier HUD warnings with vis­
ual and/or auditory icon helps drivers locate potential 
threats earlier and encourages them to start deceleration 
operations earlier.
Manipulation reflects the braking deceleration behavior 
of the driver to avoid collisions, commonly characterized by 
maximum deceleration, maximum brake pedal force, and 
average speed. Hajiseyedjavadi et al. (2018) studied the 
effectiveness of different warning timing on young drivers 
hazard anticipation and hazard mitigation abilities through 
driving simulation. Speed curve analysis revealed that the 
HUD visual warning group, which received warnings 3 or 
4 seconds in advance, maintained significantly lower driving 
speeds compared to the control group or the 2-second warn­
ing group. Naujoks and Neukum (2014) studied the effects 
of HUD audio-visual warning time and warning specificity 
(direction specificity and conflict specificity) on driver driv­
ing performance through a driving simulator. The results of 
repeated measurement analysis of variance suggest that pro­
viding earlier warning (3.87s) in pedestrian crossing events 
outside the zebra crossing can reduce the driver’s braking 
intensity.
The risk avoidance result is the ultimate manifestation of 
the effectiveness of HUD warning on pedestrian collision 
avoidance, which is often quantified by collision frequency, 
minimum collision distance, time-to-collision (TTC)/time- 
to-arrival (TTA) and other indicators. Taking pedestrian 
crossing events outside the zebra crossing as an example, 
Winkler et al. (2015) explored the impact of different HUD 
visual warning contents (warning strategies and specificity) 
on driver driving performance using a driving simulator. It 
was found that all driver warnings affected the drivers’ per­
formance positively. Although the number of collisions did 
not decrease, the HUD warning significantly reduced the 
severity of the collision. Ali et al. (2020) tested the impact of 
the connected environment on driving behavior and safety 
in various safety-critical scenarios through driving simula­
tion experiments and conducted data analysis using a linear 
mixed model (LMM). The results indicate that in a 
connected environment, HUD pedestrian warnings accom­
panied by beeps help drivers maintain a longer time-to- 
collision to the pedestrian.
In fact, the perception and decision, manipulation, and 
risk avoidance result are not mutually independent. The 
driver’s manipulation behavior will be influenced by the per­
ception and decision, and the final risk avoidance result will 
be jointly influenced by the perception and decision and 
manipulation. They collectively reflect the driver’s braking 
avoidance strategy. Previous studies have primarily explored 
the impact of the HUD warning on driver perception and 
decision, manipulation, and risk avoidance results from the 
perspectives of warning modality, timing, and content. 
However, it is currently unclear how different warning types 
(HDD and HUD) affect driver braking risk avoidance strat­
egies. The purpose of this paper is to explore how different 
warning types (HDD and HUD) affect driver braking risk 
avoidance strategies and whether the HUD warning can 
help drivers choose the optimal braking risk avoidance 
strategy.
2.3. Test tool for HUD warning utility
From Chapter 2.2, it can be seen that driving simulation has 
become an important tool for testing the effectiveness of 
HUD warnings. It allows to construct a connected environ­
ment to realize effective interaction and real-time warning 
among vehicle-to-vehicle, vehicle-to-cyclist and vehicle-to- 
pedestrian (Ali et al., 2020). At the same time, it can create 
safety-critical scenarios and various weather conditions, 
allowing experimenters to observe user behavior in safe 
environments without worrying about any accident costs 
(Calvi et al., 2020). In addition, driving simulators can pro­
vide a high degree of experimental control and fine-grained 
driving behavior data, which has been widely used in micro- 
driving behavior analysis (Raddaoui et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 
2021). It is undeniable that driving simulations also have 
certain limitations. Compared to real driving, the driver’s 
psychological feelings and perception of speed and distance 
information in driving simulation may be different (Ross 
et al., 2021). It is worth noting that although driving simula­
tions have inherent limitations, relative validity is still feas­
ible with a driving simulator (Fisher et al., 2011; Galante 
et al., 2010), which was confirmed by recent work by 
Hussain et al. (2019) with respect to speed perception and 
actual speed. The braking behavior of drivers in driving sim­
ulators has also been proven to be comparable to real driv­
ing (Boda et al., 2018). Previous studies on the effectiveness 
testing of warning systems have also cited relevant literature 
to theoretically demonstrate that the limitations of driving 
simulations do not affect the effectiveness of research results 
(Brijs et al., 2022; Winkler et al., 2018a). Based on this, driv­
ing simulation is used as the testing tool for this study. By 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
3727

--- Page 6 ---
using a highly simulated driving simulator and constructing 
a more realistic road environment, this paper provides driv­
ers with a more realistic driving experience, further narrow­
ing the difference between driving simulation and the real 
environment.
2.4 A method of exploring multiple influencing factors
Similar to general linear models and generalized linear mod­
els, the generalized linear mixed model (GLMM) is also a 
commonly used method for exploring influencing factors 
and quantifying the degree of impact. The generalized linear 
mixed model (GLMM) combines the characteristics of two 
statistical frameworks: the linear mixed model (random 
effects) and the generalized linear model (non-normal data), 
which can deal with a variety of research designs and data 
types, and fit data with non-normal distributions and com­
plex correlation structures (Fei et al., 2013; Nelder & 
Wedderburn, 1972). GLMM has been widely applied in 
driving behavior research. Zhao et al. (2022) used GLMM to 
explore the influence of driver attribute factors and takeover 
situation factors and their interaction on takeover behavior. 
Adavikottu and Velaga (2023) quantitatively analyzed the 
impact of factors such as driver characteristics and different 
levels of aggressive driver behavior on the collision risk at 
unsignalized intersections using GLMM. Based on this, con­
sidering the data structure and distribution, this paper 
selects GLMM to quantitatively analyze the factors that 
affect the driver’s braking avoidance strategy.
3. Methods
Based on a driving simulator, this paper has completed the 
construction of the connected experimental scenario and the 
development of HUD and HDD interfaces.
All subjects must drive in six urban road scenarios: three 
warning display types (Baseline/HDD/HUD) combined with 
two weather conditions (clear weather/foggy weather). Then, 
based on fine-grained driving behavior data, the risk avoid­
ance process was characterized and indicators were 
extracted. Finally, considering the data structure and distri­
bution of this paper, the Generalized Linear Mixed Model 
(GLMM) was used to explore the factors affecting brake 
risk-avoidance strategies.
3.1. Connected driving simulation experiment platform
This paper builds a driving simulation experiment platform 
under the connected environment, which is composed of the 
driving simulation system, the human factor data-acquisition 
system, the data collaborative processing center and the vehicle 
terminal (human machine interface, HMI). Each component is 
interconnected using wireless communication technology. The 
architecture of the experimental platform is shown in Figure 1.
3.1.1. Driving simulation system
The driving simulation system is composed of a fixed-base 
driving simulator and a computer located in Beijing 
University of Technology, as shown in Figure 2. The driving 
simulation system has the functions of virtual scenario 
design and development, on-board data acquisition, data 
transmission, etc. The design and development of virtual 
scenarios include the construction of roads and the setting 
of built-in parameters. After completion, the scenario is 
imported into the driving simulation system, and the wea­
ther, traffic flow and other scenario elements are added 
through the application program interface (API). The on- 
board data acquisition includes the operating parameters of 
the vehicle and adjacent related vehicles (such as speed, 
acceleration, brake-pedal depth, accelerator-pedal efficacy, 
Figure 1. Connected driving simulation experiment platform.
3728
Y. ZHANG ET AL.

--- Page 7 ---
lateral position, etc.). The acquisition frequency is set to 
30 Hz and transmitted to the collaborative data management 
center through the user data protocol (UDP).
3.1.2. Human factor data-acquisition system
The human factor data-acquisition system obtains the drivers’ 
eye-movement data through the eye-movement instrument. 
This paper only analyzes driving behavior, and the eye-move­
ment data obtained will be studied in other articles.
3.1.3. Data collaborative processing center
The data collaborative processing center receives the vehicle, 
road and environment information from the driving simula­
tion system in real time, and the transmission mode can be 
regarded as the combination of V2V and V2I communica­
tion. This information further filters and fuses the data; and 
then interconnects with the vehicle terminal HMI over WiFi.
3.1.4. Vehicle terminal HMI
The vehicle terminal HMI involved in this paper was one of 
either HDD or HUD. The HDD or HUD receives the fil­
tered and fused data from the data collaborative processing 
center and completes the real-time dynamic release of driv­
ing assistance information.
3.2. Experimental design
3.2.1 Information interaction design
The experimental design included three warning display 
types, which were: Baseline, HDD and HUD. Only voice 
navigation information was provided in the Baseline condi­
tion, while HUD and HDD provide safety warning informa­
tion in the connected environment.
In the interface design of HUD, this paper comprehen­
sively considered the cognitive ability of the driver, the size 
limitation of the HUD (Strayer et al., 2019) and the current 
situation of in-vehicle driving assistance system products 
(Audi A7). At the same time, the interface design principles 
of importance, use frequency, functional grouping and use 
sequence were followed (Abdel-Aty et al., 2007). The HUD 
interface in the connected environment was finally designed 
and developed as shown in Figure 3. According to the con­
tents of the information to be displayed, the HUD was div­
ided into four sections: vehicle state information, navigation 
information, safety warning information and entertainment 
and communication information. The safety warning 
information section can present continuous and on-time 
event-triggered connected information, such as continuous 
information about the spacing to the leader and event-trig­
gered information about pedestrian crossing. The displayed 
contents of each section are shown in Figure 3.
The size of the HUD is greatly affected by the type of 
vehicle and interface design, and there is no unified stand­
ard. Taking into consideration the type of driving simulator 
and the consistency with HDD size, we set the size of the 
HUD interface at 215.5 mm  124.2 mm. The HUD was 
developed using the SCANeR software, which was integrated 
into the driving simulation, used WiFi real-time communi­
cation, and was finally displayed on the road above the 
steering wheel. In order to ensure the uniqueness of varia­
bles, the interface design and size of the HDD were com­
pletely consistent with those of the HUD. The only 
difference was the position of the two displays. HDD was 
displayed by HUAWEI pad M3 and placed in the right front 
of the vehicle steering wheel, which was similar to the posi­
tion of the central control panel in the vehicle. See Figure 4.
3.2.2 Scenario design
Six scenarios were designed for the experiment, covering 
three warning display types (Baseline/HDD/HUD) combined 
with two weather conditions (clear weather/foggy weather). 
When using a warning display, the driver’s experiences from 
start to finish are shown in Figure 5(a). The three warning 
display types were connected into a loop, and the driver 
drove a circle in each of the two weather conditions (clear 
Figure 3. HDD/HUD interface design.
Figure 2. Fixed-base driving simulator.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
3729

--- Page 8 ---
weather/foggy weather). Except for the warning display type 
and weather, the event design in all six scenarios is the 
same. To avoid driving fatigue and learning effects, multiple 
bus stops and roadside parked buses will be set up on the 
road sections outside the scope of the event’s impact in each 
scenario. Pedestrians or animals may appear behind some 
parked buses. And we will change the color, number and 
type of parked vehicles on the roadside. In addition, the sur­
rounding environment (buildings, trees) also changes in 
each scenario.
The experimental scenario was a 4 km long urban road, 
and five typical, hazardous events are designed, including 
left-side vehicle merging, conflict with traffic in the opposite 
direction, hidden pedestrian crossing outside the zebra 
crossing, and conflict with turning left and emergency stop 
of vehicle ahead, as shown in Figure 5(a). This paper only 
considers the hidden pedestrian crossing event outside the 
zebra crossing; the rest will be studied in other articles.
The scenario design of the hidden pedestrian crossing 
event outside the zebra crossing is shown in Figure 5(b). 
The road where the event occurs is a two-way, four lane 
road with a lane width of 3.5 m, a sidewalk width of 5 m 
and a speed limit of 60 km/h. The experiment set up two 
weather conditions: clear weather, and foggy weather with 
visibility of 240 m. According to the “Grade of fog forecast” 
(GB/T 27964 −2011, China), the visibility of dense fog con­
dition is less than 500 m and more than 200 m. This visibil­
ity fog reduces the driver’s perception of the surrounding 
environment and speed, which can affect their decision and 
behavior (Abdel-Aty et al., 2011; Yan et al., 2014). In the 
free-flow state, there was a stable traffic flow in the left lane 
of this road section, forcing the main vehicle to drive only 
in the right lane, and there were no other vehicles ahead in 
the main vehicle’s lane, so the longitudinal behavior of the 
main vehicle was not constrained. The pedestrian was 2.5 m 
away from the right edge line of the lane and was blocked 
by the bus. In order to avoid learning effects as much as 
possible, the type and color of buses will be changed during 
scenario design, and some parked buses will be added on 
the roadside, but no pedestrians will appear. The roadside 
equipment/infrastructure detected the pedestrian (a typical 
V2I case), and both the HUD and HDD in the connected 
environment started issuing warning messages when the 
main vehicle reached the point 100 m from the pedestrian. 
When the main vehicle reached the point 60 m from the 
pedestrian, the pedestrian was activated and began to cross 
the road at a speed of 1 m/s. The main vehicle could only 
slow down to avoid pedestrians, and the event ended after it 
passed the pedestrian position.
The HDD and HUD warnings designed in this paper are 
accompanied by voice prompts. The voice prompt “pay 
attention to pedestrians in front” started at 100 m from the 
pedestrians, and the prompt was given only once. At the 
same time, the safety warning section in the HUD and 
HDD interface indicated the graphic symbol for pedestrians 
crossing the road in front, and the warning graphic symbol 
did not disappear until the vehicle passed the pedestrian 
position, as shown in Figure 5(c).
3.3. Participants
In this experiment, subjects from universities and social 
groups who met the requirements were recruited. The 
recruited subjects needed to meet three conditions: (1) have 
or obtain a motor vehicle driver’s license; (2) normal hear­
ing and vision; and (3) no nausea, dizziness or other prob­
lems. After screening, forty eligible subjects were recruited, 
including five pre-experimenters and thirty-five formal 
experimenters. The main purpose of the pre-experiment was 
to test the rationality of the experimental design and 
arrangement, so statistical analyses were not done. One of 
the formal experimenters withdrew from the experiment due 
to scheduling conflicts, so the final sample size was thirty- 
four, of which twenty-five (73.53%) were male and nine 
(26.47%) were female. The sex ratio was roughly in line with 
current statistical characteristics of Chinese drivers (Ministry 
of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China, 2020). 
The subjects’ age is between 21 and 53 years (Mean ¼ 29.21, 
SD ¼ 9.46). Their driving experience ranges between 1 and 
22 years (Mean ¼ 6, SD ¼ 5.16). The demographic data for 
the thirty-four subjects in the formal experiment are shown 
in Table 2.
In order to ensure the effectiveness of the results, it is 
necessary to calculate the sample size required for the 
experiment. The required sample size was calculated 
according to the expected variance, target confidence 
level and error amplitude (Chen et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 
2021):
Figure 4. HDD/HUD setting position.
3730
Y. ZHANG ET AL.

--- Page 9 ---
N ¼ ðza=2 þ zbÞ2r2
e2 
where N is the required sample size, za=2 is the upper (a=2)th 
quantile of the standard normal distribution; zb is the upper 
(b)th quantile of the standard normal distribution; r is the 
standard deviation of the normal distribution population; e is 
the difference between the true mean response of a test factor 
and a reference value, which can be given by e ¼ 6dr 
(Lerman, 1996), d is the meaningful difference, in practice, a 
value between 0.25 and 0.5 is usually chosen as d if no prior 
knowledge (Chow et al., 2017). Typically, a 5% level of sig­
nificance is chosen to reflect a 95% confidence regarding the 
unknown parameter, za=2¼1.96. To balance the power and 
cost-effectiveness, a power of 80% and a meaningful differ­
ence of 0.5 were used, zb¼0.84, d¼0.5. The results showed 
that the required sample size in this research was 32, and the 
number of participants in this study was 34. So the sample 
size selected in this experiment met the requirements, and 
could provide reliable answers to the research questions.
Figure 5. Scenario design of the hidden pedestrian crossing event outside the zebra crossing.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
3731

--- Page 10 ---
3.4. Experimental procedure
There were six formal scenarios in the experiment (see 
Section 3.2). Each subject was asked to drive in all six scen­
arios to ensure a similar distribution of subject characteris­
tics in the experiment. In order to eliminate the memory 
effect as much as possible, the scenario orders for each par­
ticipant were determined using a Latin square. In addition, 
the six scenarios were arranged to be completed over two 
working days, with an interval of three days in between. For 
scenarios completed on the same day, subjects were required 
to rest for five minutes after each scenario was completed, 
and will be arranged to complete another city road scenario 
that is not used for analysis. There are a total of six such 
informal scenarios, with three assigned per workday. The 
specific experimental steps were as follows:
Before the test: ‹ subjects filled in a demographic ques­
tionnaire, recording gender, age, driving experience and 
other information; › the experimenter briefly introduced 
the experimental process and the on-board information 
interface to the subjects; the subjects were asked to complete 
a pre-test in an informal test scenario to test whether the 
subjects adapted to the driving simulator environment; fi 
the experimenters read out the experimental instructions to 
the subjects, and told them to follow their regular driving 
habits, abide by the traffic rules and information guidance, 
and complete the driving task safely.
In the test: fl subjects adjusted their seats to sit in a 
proper position; ° subjects conducted the driving simulation 
experiment in Latin square order, with an individual experi­
mental scenario lasting about five minutes; – after a single 
scenario, subjects rested for approximate five minutes; † on 
the first working day, subjects repeat steps fl–– to complete 
the set of three formal experimental scenarios and three 
informal experimental scenarios not used for analysis; ‡ after 
three days, the remaining scenarios were completed in the 
second working day, and experimental steps fl –† repeated.
After the test: · the experimenters checked the behavioral 
data records of the subjects. After verifying that there were 
no missing data, each subject received a reward of 160 yuan.
3.5. Data extraction
For the hidden pedestrian crossing event outside the zebra 
crossing, the warning point and pedestrian position are the 
start and end points of the impact range for the event, 
respectively; this was a length of 100 m, as shown in Figure 
5(b). Basic driving behavior data were collected within these 
100 m, including speed, acceleration, brake-pedal depth and 
accelerator-pedal efficiency, etc. The required indicators can 
be further calculated from basic driving behavior data.
3.6. Process analysis and index extraction
3.6.1. Description of braking risk-avoidance process
In the experimental design of this paper, drivers can only 
avoid danger by braking. Thus, this paper provides a 
detailed description of the braking risk-avoidance process 
for drivers under the hidden pedestrian crossing event out­
side the zebra crossing. In the scenario of using an HUD in 
clear weather, we selected one driver from 34 drivers and 
drew a spatial variation diagram of his driving behavior 
within 100 m from pedestrians, as shown in Figure 6. In this 
figure, the ordinates are speed, acceleration, brake-pedal effi­
ciency and accelerator-pedal efficiency, respectively; the 
abscissa is the distance, where 0 m is the warning point of 
the HUD and HDD, 40 m is the pedestrian trigger point, 
and 100 m is the pedestrian point. Figure 6 contains two 
dimensions: vertical and horizontal.
3.6.1.1. Vertical dimension. According to the running char­
acteristics of the vehicle, the vertical dimension is divided 
into three levels: (i) manipulation, (ii) operation and (iii) 
risk avoidance, and these three levels are progressive. (i) The 
manipulation level reflects the manipulation and control 
behavior of the vehicle, including the spatial-change curve 
of brake-pedal efficiency and accelerator-pedal efficiency; (ii) 
the operation level reflects the operation status of the 
vehicle, including the spatial-change curve of speed and 
acceleration; (iii) the risk-avoidance level reflects the driver’s 
cognitive risk-avoidance process, including the start point of 
risk avoidance (warning point) and the end point of risk 
avoidance (minimum collision distance point).
3.6.1.2. Horizontal dimension. According to the cognitive 
processes of drivers, the horizontal dimension is divided 
into three stages: (i) perception and decision, (ii) risk-avoid­
ance manipulation and (iii) risk-avoidance result. (i) The 
perception and decision stage reflects the driver’s percep­
tion-judgment-decision process, starting from the warning 
Table 2. Statistics of driver’s basic information.
Attribute
Level
Number
Ratio (%)
Gender
Male
25
73.53
Female
9
26.47
Age
< 26
16
47.06
26––57
18
52.94
Driving experience
Beginner (< 3 years)
16
47.06
Middle (4–9 years)
11
32.35
Senior (> 10 years)
7
20.59
Driving frequency
Rarely driving (Driving less than four times a month)
20
58.82
Driving every week
14
41.18
Prior experience with HUD
Not at all
15
44.12
Heard it before, but wasn’t sure what it was.
10
29.41
Know but never used
5
14.71
Used
4
11.76
3732
Y. ZHANG ET AL.

--- Page 11 ---
point (the risk-avoidance starting point) and ending at the 
point of the first braking. The key points include the accel­
erator-pedal release point and the first braking point. (ii) 
The risk-avoidance manipulation stage reflects the process 
in which the driver effects the deceleration through the 
manipulation and adjustment of the brake pedal, starting at 
the first braking point and ending at the minimum speed 
point. The key points include the maximum deceleration 
point and the braking end point. (iii) The risk-avoidance 
result stage reflects the recovery process after the deceler­
ation is completed, starting at the minimum speed point 
and ending at the pedestrian point. The key points include 
the minimum speed point and the minimum conflict dis­
tance point (the risk-avoidance ending point). Based on the 
detailed description of the whole braking risk-avoidance 
process and the marking of key points in space, the braking 
risk-avoidance strategy can be obtained.
In order to verify that the key points we selected can 
reflect different braking risk-avoidance processes and strat­
egies, we further characterized the same driver’s spatial vari­
ation of braking risk-avoidance process in the Baseline, 
HDD and HUD groups under clear weather conditions, as 
shown in Figure 7. Figure 7 marked the key points selected 
in Figure 6, including the accelerator-pedal release point, the 
first braking point, the maximum deceleration point, the 
braking end point, the minimum speed point, and the min­
imum conflict distance point. It can be seen that there are 
differences in the key points among the Baseline, HDD and 
HUD groups.
3.6.2. Index extraction
Based on the description of the process in the previous sec­
tion, we selected the corresponding indicators from the 
three stages of perception and decision; risk-avoidance 
manipulation; and risk-avoidance results to reflect the driv­
er’s braking risk-avoidance strategy (see Table 3).
3.7. Model selection and construction
3.7.1. Model selection
This paper aims to explore the effects of three warning dis­
play types (Baseline/HDD/HUD) combined with two wea­
ther conditions (clear weather/foggy weather) on drivers’ 
braking 
risk-avoidance 
strategies; 
consider 
differences 
between drivers’ attributes (gender, driving experience, 
Figure 6. Spatial variation of braking risk-avoidance processes in HUD group under clear weather conditions. (full name of abbreviations in the figure: accelerator- 
pedal release point (APRP), first braking point (FBP), maximum deceleration point (DPmax), brake end point (BEP), minimum speed point (SPmin), minimum collision 
distance point (CDPmin).
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
3733

--- Page 12 ---
driving frequency); and the interaction among these differ­
ent factors. In order to explore the factors affecting the indi­
cators of the braking risk-avoidance strategy and quantify 
the differences between levels of the same factor, taking into 
account the distribution of the data (the Shapiro-Wilk test 
showed that some of the experimental data do not follow 
the normal distribution) and the random effects caused by 
repeated experiments and differences between individuals, a 
Generalized Linear Mixed Model (GLMM) was selected.
3.7.2. GLMM construction
Taking the six indicators extracted in Section 3.6 as depend­
ent variables, six GLMMs were established. The independent 
variables included fixed effects and random effects. The 
fixed effects included warning display types, weather condi­
tions, and driver attributes (gender, driving experience, driv­
ing frequency). The random effects included: (i) correlation 
of repeated measurement data (warning display types, wea­
ther conditions); and (ii) individual heterogeneity (gender, 
Figure 7. Spatial variation of braking risk-avoidance processes in baseline, HDD and HUD groups under clear weather conditions. (note that the blue lines and sym­
bols represent the baseline group; grey lines and symbols represent the HDD group; purple lines and symbols represent the HUD group.) (the full name of the 
abbreviations are consistent with those in Figure 6, and baseline, HDD and HUD of subscript forms combined with abbreviations respectively.).
3734
Y. ZHANG ET AL.

--- Page 13 ---
driving experience, driving frequency). The specific model 
construction is included in Table 4.
4. Results and discussion
In this chapter, descriptive statistics were completed for six 
indicators under different warning display types and weather 
conditions. And a detailed analysis and discussion were con­
ducted on the obtained GLMM results. Finally, the limita­
tions and future research of this paper were explained.
In order to ensure the effectiveness of the results, the 
impact of the learning effect was separately tested. 
According to the experimental order, all data were divided 
into 6 groups. Considering that the data does not follow a 
normal distribution (Shapiro-Wilk test) and the correlation 
between samples, the Friedman test in the non parametric 
test was selected, and the test results are shown in Table 5. 
The results showed that there was no significant difference 
in each indicator among different experimental order groups 
(p > 0.05), indicating that the learning effect did not reach a 
significant impact.
4.1. Descriptive statistics
Descriptive statistics were calculated for the six indicators 
under different warning display type and weather conditions, 
and the results were expressed in the form of mean value 
(standard deviation, SD), as shown in Table 6. Scatter plots of 
the six indicators for all thirty-four drivers using the different 
warning display types are also shown. It can be seen from the 
plots that there may be differences between indicators under 
different warning display types and weather conditions.
4.2. Model result analysis and discussion
First, the data was pre-processed to delete abnormal or wrong 
data according to Pauta standard, also referred to as 3r cri­
terion (Du et al., 2021). Based on the processed data, the 
GLMM was established, and the model was fit with the help 
of SPSS 25. Then, the covariance structure with the minimum 
Akaike information criterion (AIC) and Bayesian information 
criterion (BIC) was selected. The fixed effects and fixed-effect 
solutions for the model are shown in Tables 7 and 8.
Table 3. Index system.
Braking risk-avoidance  
strategy
Indexes
Description
Notes
Perception and decision  
stage
Position of accelerator- 
pedal release (m)
Position of accelerator pedal release is the 
distance between the driver’s first 
accelerator pedal release point and the 
warning point
The driver senses the pedestrians in front 
through warnings or observation. In order 
to avoid a collision, the driver releases the 
accelerator pedal, which represents the 
driver’s perception stage.
Position of first  
braking (m)
Position of first brake is the distance between 
the driver’s first braking point and the 
warning point.
After perception takes place, the driver makes 
a preliminary judgment according to the 
current environment and the operational 
status of the vehicle. Stepping on the brake 
is the key point between judgment and 
action.
Risk-avoidance  
manipulation stage
Maximum deceleration  
(m/s2)
Maximum deceleration is the maximum 
deceleration taken by the driver within the 
100 m between the warning point and the 
pedestrian position.
The maximum deceleration is used to reflect 
the urgency of the driver in the face of 
hazard and the efforts that the driver needs 
to make to avoid a collision.
Braking distance (m)
The braking distance is the distance that the 
driver passed after stepping on the brake 
pedal within the 100 m between the 
warning point and the pedestrian position.
The braking distance combined with the 
maximum deceleration is used to reflect the 
urgency of the driver in the face of hazard 
and the stability of the deceleration control 
process.
Risk-avoidance  
result stage
Minimum collision  
distance (m)
Minimum collision distance is the minimum 
collision distance between the main vehicle 
and the pedestrian once the pedestrian 
starts moving, until they leave the lane 
where the main vehicle is located.
The minimum collision distance reflects the 
final risk-avoidance result.
Position of minimum  
speed (m)
Minimum speed position is the distance 
between the position where the driver 
reaches the minimum speed and the 
warning point.
The driver slows down, reduces the speed to 
the lowest point, and then accelerates 
again. The position of minimum speed 
reflects the end point of risk-avoidance in 
the driver’s mind.
Table 4. Model construction.
Effect of type
Factor
Level
Fixed/Random effects
Warning display types
Baseline/HDD/HUD
Weather conditions
clear weather/foggy weather
Driver attributes
Gender
Male/Female
Driving experience
Beginner (<3 years) 
Middle (4–9 years) 
Senior (>10 years)
Driving frequency
Driving every week/ Rarely driving
Dependent variables
‹ Position of accelerator pedal release、› Position of first brake、 
fi Maximum deceleration、fl Braking distance、° Minimum collision distance、– Position of minimum speed
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
3735

--- Page 14 ---
Table 5. Results of learning effect test.
Braking risk-avoidance strategy
Indexes
P
Perception and decision stage
Position of accelerator-pedal release (m)
0.556
Position of first braking (m)
0.595
Risk-avoidance manipulation stage
Maximum deceleration (m/s2)
0.581
Braking distance (m)
0.696
Risk-avoidance result stage
Minimum collision distance (m)
0.331
Position of minimum speed (m)
0.054
Table 6. Descriptive statistics.
Indexes
Warning display types
Mean (SD)
Scatter diagram
Clear weather
Foggy weather
Position of accelerator-pedal release 
(m)
Baseline
49.99 (11.53)
55.02 (15.46)
HDD
32.02 (9.87)
32.50 (15.33)
HUD
16.10 (6.81)
13.34 (4.29)
Position of first brake 
(m)
Baseline
64.50 (10.22)
68.22 (10.07)
HDD
53.16 (12.26)
47.18 (12.73)
HUD
27.33 (7.98)
23.96 (5.72)
Maximum deceleration 
(m/s2)
Baseline
−8.30 (1.94)
−7.77 (2.66)
HDD
−6.94 (2.34)
−6.59 (1.88)
HUD
−5.03 (1.23)
−4.61 (1.12)
Braking distance 
(m)
Baseline
21.24 (5.12)
19.55 (5.09)
HDD
27.00 (10.60)
31.60 (10.61)
HUD
36.83 (8.08)
36.73 (12.96)
Minimum collision distance 
(m)
Baseline
10.75 (6.97)
10.63 (6.42)
HDD
15.02 (5.25)
16.36 (5.38)
HUD
20.96 (6.58)
21.65 (5.91)
Position of minimum speed 
(m)
Baseline
86.14 (7.85)
86.94 (5.86)
HDD
81.24 (9.26)
81.42 (8.41)
HUD
73.75 (12.64)
74.52 (13.20)
3736
Y. ZHANG ET AL.

--- Page 15 ---
Table 7 only shows the variables that had significant 
effects on the six indicators of a driver’s braking risk-avoid­
ance strategy. First, in the two indicators for the perception 
and decision stage, only the warning display type (p < 0.001) 
had a statistical difference on the position of accelerator- 
pedal release; warning display type (p < 0.001), driving fre­
quency (p ¼ 0.019), interaction between gender and driving 
experience (p ¼ 0.002), and interaction between driving 
experience and driving frequency (p ¼ 0.009) had significant 
effects on the position of first braking. Second, in the two 
indicators for the risk-avoidance manipulation stage, there 
were statistical differences in the effects of warning display 
type (p < 0.001), weather conditions (p ¼ 0.016), driving 
experience (p ¼ 0.009), interaction between weather condi­
tions and gender (p ¼ 0.026), and interaction between driv­
ing experience and driving frequency (p ¼ 0.008) on 
maximum deceleration; the effects of warning display type 
(p < 0.001) and the interaction between warning display type 
and gender (p ¼ 0.021) on braking distance were statistically 
different. Finally, in the two indicators for the risk-avoid­
ance result stage, the impacts of warning display type 
(p < 0.001), driving experience (p ¼ 0.017), driving frequency 
(p ¼ 0.020), and the interaction between gender and driving 
frequency (p ¼ 0.037) on the minimum conflict distance 
were statistically different; only warning display type 
(p < 0.001) had a significant effect on the position of min­
imum speed.
Table 8 only shows the variables that had significant 
effects on the six indicators and gives the coefficients of 
their fixed effect solutions. The difference between different 
levels of the same independent variable is then obtained. 
The analysis of Table 8 is divided into analysis of indicator 
characteristics and analysis of influencing factors.
4.2.1. Analysis of indicator characteristics
Analysis of indicator characteristics refers to analyzing the 
influencing factors of six indicators and the differences 
between different levels of the same factor from three stages 
in Table 8.
4.2.1.1. Perception and decision stage 
For the position of accelerator-pedal release and the position 
of first braking, smaller values indicated closer proximity to 
the starting position, which meant that the driver completed 
the perception and decision stage earlier (Calvi et al., 2020).
4.2.1.1.1. Position of accelerator-pedal release. Taking the 
Baseline group as the reference, the position of accelerator- 
pedal release for the HUD and HDD groups were signifi­
cantly closer to the starting position (HUD: p < 0.001; HDD: 
p < 0.001); of these, the HUD group was closer. Compared 
to drivers with beginner driving experience (< 3 years), driv­
ers with middle driving experience (4–9 years) released the 
accelerator pedal earlier (p ¼ 0.030). Taking the Baseline 
group as the reference, the interaction between the warning 
display types and weather conditions showed that the HUD 
group released the accelerator pedal earlier in foggy weather 
than in clear weather (p ¼ 0.032); the interaction between 
warning display types and driving experience showed that 
the position of accelerator-pedal release for drivers with 
middle driving experience was farther away than that of 
drivers with beginner driving experience in the HDD and 
HUD group (HDD: p ¼ 0.019；HUD: 0.076). This indicated 
that HUD and HDD increased the driving confidence of 
drivers with middle driving experience, and they chose to 
release the accelerator pedal later. In other words, the 
improvement of driving confidence also reduced their com­
pliance with HUD and HDD.
4.2.1.1.2. Position of first brake. Taking the Baseline group as 
the reference, the position of first braking for the HUD and 
HDD groups was closer to the starting position (HUD: 
p < 0.001; HDD: p < 0.001) of these, the HUD group was 
closer. In terms of driver attributes, drivers with senior driv­
ing experience (> 10 years) started braking further away from 
the starting point, as compared to drivers with beginner driv­
ing experience (p ¼ 0.034); drivers who drive every week 
started braking further away than drivers who rarely drive 
(p ¼ 0.033). The reason for this may be that drivers with dif­
ferent driving experiences have different observation strategies 
(Crundall et al., 1999). After receiving a warning or perceiv­
ing the hazard, experienced drivers will spend more time 
observing the changes in the hazard to determine when to 
brake (Yeung & Wong, 2015). An interesting finding is that 
the distance required to complete the perception and decision 
stages first decreases, and then increases with increasing driv­
ing experience. Further exploration is needed to confirm this 
pattern. Taking the Baseline group as a reference, the inter­
action between the warning display types and weather condi­
tions showed that the position of first braking of the HUD 
and HDD groups in foggy weather was earlier than in clear 
weather (HUD in foggy weather vs. HUD in clear weather, 
p ¼ 0.035; HDD in foggy weather vs. HDD in clear weather, 
p ¼ 0.011). This phenomenon was due to the fact that drivers’ 
ability to perceive the outside environment decreases in foggy 
weathers, and they rely more on the in-vehicle warning dis­
plays, showing higher attention and compliance to the warn­
ing information (Yue et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2021b). The 
interaction between warning display types and driving experi­
ence showed that the position of first braking for drivers with 
middle driving experience was further away than drivers with 
beginner driving experience in the HDD group (p ¼ 0.042). 
In the interaction between gender and driving experience, 
taking male as the reference, the position of first braking of 
females with senior driving experience was earlier than 
females with beginner driving experience (p < 0.001). In the 
interaction between driving frequency and driving experience, 
taking drivers who rarely drive as the reference, drivers with 
senior driving experience (>10 years) showed an earlier first 
braking position than those with beginner driving experience 
(<3 years) among drivers who drive every week (> 10 years) 
(p ¼ 0.004).
4.2.1.2. Risk-avoidance manipulation stage 
Smaller absolute values of maximum deceleration and 
greater braking distances indicated a lower degree of 
urgency in the manipulation stages (Winkler et al., 2018b).
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
3737

--- Page 16 ---
Table 7. Fixed effect.
Indexes
Perceptual and decision stage
Risk-avoidance manipulation stage
Risk-avoidance result stage
Position of 
accelerator pedal 
release (m) 
F(P)
Position of first 
braking (m) 
F(P)
Maximum 
deceleration (m/ 
s2) 
F(P)
Braking distance 
(m) 
F(P)
Minimum 
collision distance 
(m) 
F(P)
Position of 
minimum speed 
(m) 
F(P)
Warning display types
164.732 
(<0.001)
170.244 
(<0.001)
40.513 
(<0.001)
30.513 
(<0.001)
32.983 
(<0.001)
23.157 
(<0.001)
Weather conditions
0.194 
(0.660)
1.285 
(0.259)
5.956 
(0.016)
0.784 
(0.377)
0.022 
(0.882)
0.365 
(0.547)
Driver attributes
Gender
1.198 
(0.275)
3.496 
(0.063)
0.406 
(0.525)
2.966 
(0.087)
0.838 
(0.361)
1.059 
(0.305)
Driving 
experience
0.116 
(0.890)
2.483 
(0.087)
4.864 
(0.009)
0.701 
(0.498)
4.206 
(0.017)
1.549 
(0.216)
Driving frequency
0.283 
(0.595)
5.584 
(0.019)
0.345 
(0.558)
0.638 
(0.426)
5.475 
(0.020)
0.016 
(0.901)
Interaction effect
Warning display 
types 
Weather 
conditions
2.580 
(0.079)
3.877 
(0.023)
0.046 
(0.955)
2.188 
(0.115)
0.164 
(0.849)
0.024 
(0.977)
Warning display 
types 
Gender
1.042 
(0.355)
0.665 
(0.516)
0.230 
(0.795)
3.968 
(0.021)
0.569 
(0.567)
2.833 
(0.062)
Weather 
conditions 
 Gender
0.166 
(0.684)
0.148 
(0.701)
5.054 
(0.026)
0.053 
(0.819)
0.077 
(0.782)
0.366 
(0.546)
Gender 
Driving 
experience
1.086 
(0.340)
6.417 
(0.002)
1.723 
(0.182)
0.267 
(0.766)
2.607 
(0.077)
2.348 
(0.099)
Gender 
Driving 
frequency
0.376 
(0.540)
3.878 
(0.051)
1.204 
(0.274)
0.790 
(0.376)
4.442 
(0.037)
0.437 
(0.509)
Driving frequency 
Driving 
experience
1.468 
(0.233)
4.871 
(0.009)
4.905 
(0.008)
1.776 
(0.173)
0.446 
(0.641)
0.166 
(0.847)
Covariance type
Variance 
component
First order 
Autoregression
Variance 
component
Variance 
component
Variance 
component
Variance 
component
AIC
1364.028
1246.825
753.870
1267.496
1150.048
1310.295
BIC
1391.185
1273.041
783.844
1297.126
1179.679
1340.065
Significant at 10% (bold values).
Significant at the 5% (bold values).
3738
Y. ZHANG ET AL.

--- Page 17 ---
Table 8. Model fixed effect solution.
Indexes
Level
Perceptual and decision stage
Risk-avoidance manipulation stage
Risk-avoidance result stage
Position of accelerator pedal  
release Coefficient  
(m) (P)
Position of first  
braking Coefficient  
(m) (P)
Maximum  
deceleration 
Coefficient (m/s2) (P)
Braking  
distance 
Coefficient (m) (P)
Minimum collision  
distance 
Coefficient (m) (P)
Position of  
minimum speed 
Coefficient (m) (P)
Intercept
51.906 
(<0.001)
62.067 
(<0.001)
27.683 
(<0.001)
21.761 
(<0.001)
9.430 
(<0.001)
86.848 
(<0.001)
Warning display types
HUD 
(Baseline)
236.292 
(<0.001)
239.104 
(<0.001)
3.451 
(<0.001)
19.595 
(<0.001)
9.412 
(<0.001)
29.194 
(0.018)
HDD 
(Baseline)
223.822 
(<0.001)
215.242 
(<0.001)
1.832 
(0.018)
8.268 
(0.008)
6.186 
(0.007)
26.366 
(0.042)
Driving experience
Senior (>10 years) 
(Beginner (<3 years))
1.782 
(0.734)
10.228 
(0.034)
22.283 
(0.012)
26.683 
(0.030)
2.446 
(0.418)
−0.246 
(0.949)
Middle (4–9 years) 
(Beginner (<3 years))
29.716 
(0.030)
−4.480 
(0.263)
−0.318 
(0.678)
−1.792 
(0.535)
4.145 
(0.098)
−3.818 
(0.241)
Driving frequency
Driving every week 
(Rarely driving)
−0.852 
(0.840)
8.108 
(0.033)
−0.980 
(0.184)
0.100 
(0.967)
−0.826 
(0.730)
2.041 
(0.515)
Warning display types 

Weather condition
HUDFoggy weather 
(HUDClear weather)
27.724 
(0.032)
27.800 
(0.035)
−0.183 
(0.768)
1.385 
(0.646)
0.626 
(0.784)
0.153 
(0.966)
HDDFoggy weather 
(HDDClear weather)
−4.170 
(0.371)
29.181 
(0.011)
−0.184 
(0.799)
6.171 
(0.038)
1.207 
(0.570)
−0.529 
(0.854)
BaselineFoggy weather
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
BaselineClear weather
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
Warning display types 

Gender
HUDFemale 
(HUDMen)
−3.466 
(0.431)
0.325 
(0.942)
−0.503 
(0.503)
28.761 
(0.019)
2.873 
(0.307)
29.125 
(0.038)
BaselineFemale
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
BaselineMale
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
Warning display types 

Driving experience
HUDMiddle (4–9 years) 
(HUDBeginner (<3 years))
7.359 
(0.076)
5.169 
(0.226)
0.011 
(0.988)
0.966 
(0.782)
−1.453 
(0.583)
4.659 
(0.262)
HDDMiddle (4–9 years) 
(HDD Beginner (<3 years))
12.711 
(0.019)
8.513 
(0.042)
21.449 
(0.085)
0.727 
(0.830)
26.036 
(0.014)
5.899 
(0.080)
BaselineSenior (>10 years)
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
BaselineMiddle (4–9 years)
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
BaselineBeginner (<3 years)
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
Weather conditions 

Gender
Foggy weatherFemale 
(Foggy weatherMale)
1.209 
(0.684)
1.422 
(0.701)
1.206 
(0.026)
0.629 
(0.819)
−0.590 
(0.782)
1.901 
(0.546)
Clear weatherFemale
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
Clear weatherMale
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
Gender 

Driving experience
FemaleSenior (>10years) 
(FemaleBeginner (<3years))
−6.085 
(0.192)
220.252 
(<0.001)
0.146 
(0.869)
2.562 
(0.539)
7.843 
(0.032)
−7.941 
(0.112)
FemaleMiddle (4–9 years) 
(FemaleBeginner (<3years))
1.221 
(0.750)
−3.187 
(0.506)
21.173 
(0.082)
−0.796 
(0.817)
3.293 
(0.221)
27.308 
(0.069)
MaleSenior (>10 years)
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
MaleMiddle (4–9 years)
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
MaleBeginner (<3 years)
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
Gender 

Driving frequency
FemaleDriving every week 
(FemaleRarely driving)
3.484 
(0.540)
14.468 
(0.051)
−1.198 
(0.274)
−5.080 
(0.376)
29.071 
(0.037)
4.018 
(0.509)
MaleDriving every week
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
MaleRarely driving
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
Driving frequency
Driving experience
Driving every weekSenior (>10 years) 
(Driving every weekBeginner (<3 years))
−0.198 
(0.958)
−14.146 
(0.004)
2.321 
(0.002)
5.790 
(0.090)
0.981 
(0.716)
−1.222 
(0.761)
Rarely drivingSenior (>10 years)
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
Rarely drivingMiddle (4–9 years)
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
Rarely drivingBeginner (<3 years)
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
0a
Significant at 10% (bold values).
Significant at the 5% (bold values).
0aReference item.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
3739

--- Page 18 ---
4.2.1.2.1. Maximum deceleration. Taking the Baseline group 
as the reference, the absolute value of the maximum deceler­
ation of the HUD and HDD groups decreased significantly 
(HUD: p < 0.001; HDD: p ¼ 0.018); of these, the HUD group 
decreased the most. The absolute value of the maximum 
deceleration of drivers with senior driving experience was 
greater than drivers with beginner driving experience 
(p ¼ 0.012). In the interaction between weather conditions 
and gender, taking clear weather as the reference, the abso­
lute value of the maximum deceleration taken by females 
was smaller than that of males in foggy weather (p ¼ 0.026). 
In the interaction between driving frequency and driving 
experience, taking drivers who rarely drive as the reference, 
the absolute value of the maximum deceleration of drivers 
with senior driving experience was smaller than drivers with 
beginner driving experience among drivers who drive every 
week (p ¼ 0.002).
4.2.1.2.2. Braking distance. Taking the Baseline group as the 
reference, the braking distances of the HUD and HDD 
groups were longer (HUD group: p < 0.001; HDD group: 
p ¼ 0.008); of these, the HUD group’s were the longest. The 
braking distance of drivers with senior driving experience 
was shorter than drivers with beginner driving experience 
(p ¼ 0.030). The farther position of accelerator-pedal release 
and first braking during the perception and decision stages 
make it necessary to take more urgent braking actions dur­
ing the risk-avoidance manipulation phase. Taking the 
Baseline group as the reference, the interaction between 
warning display types and weather conditions showed that 
the braking distance in foggy weather was longer than that 
in clear weather in the HDD group (p ¼ 0.038); and the 
interaction between warning display types and gender, 
showed that the braking distance of female drivers was 
shorter than that of male drivers in the HUD group 
(p ¼ 0.019).
4.2.1.3. Risk-avoidance result stage 
Greater minimum collision distances and an earlier position 
of the minimum speed indicated better risk-avoidance 
results (Z. Yang et al., 2019).
4.2.1.3.1. Minimum collision distance. Taking the Baseline 
group as the reference, the minimum conflict distances of 
the HUD and HDD groups were longer (HUD: p < 0.001; 
HDD: p ¼ 0.007); of these, the HUD group’s were the lon­
gest. In the interaction between warning display types and 
driving experience, taking the Baseline group as the refer­
ence, the minimum conflict distance of drivers with middle 
driving experience was smaller than that of drivers with 
beginner driving experience in the HDD group (p ¼ 0.014). 
Taking male as the reference, the interaction between gender 
and driving experience showed that females with senior 
driving experience have a greater minimum conflict distance 
than drivers with beginner driving experience (p ¼ 0.032); 
the interaction between gender and driving frequency 
showed that females who drive every week have a lower 
minimum conflict distance than drivers who rarely drive 
(p ¼ 0.037).
4.2.1.3.2. Position of minimum speed. Taking the Baseline 
group as the reference, the positions of minimum speed of 
the HUD and HDD groups were earlier (HUD: p ¼ 0.018; 
HDD: p ¼ 0.042); of these, the HUD group’s were the ear­
liest. Taking the Baseline group as the reference, the inter­
action between warning display types and gender showed 
that females reached the position of minimum speed earlier 
than males in the HUD group (p ¼ 0.038).
4.2.2. Analysis of influencing factors
Analysis of influencing factors refers to analyzing the overall 
variation patterns of the three influencing factors of warning 
display type, weather, and driver attributes in three stages in 
Table 8.
4.2.2.1. Warning display types. It can be seen that HUD 
and HDD in the connected environment help drivers allo­
cate the distance spent in the three stages more reasonably, 
helping them choose better braking risk-avoidance strategies, 
and that HUD performs better than HDD. Specifically, 
HUD can shorten perceived reaction distance and greatly 
enhance the driver’s ability to perceive danger. It enables the 
driver to appropriately extend the braking distance and 
adopt a more comfortable deceleration behavior under cur­
rent conditions. At the same time, it can increase the min­
imum conflict distance and effectively improve the ultimate 
level of safety. There is evidence that HUD pedestrian warn­
ings change the braking process from a panic brake (slow 
reaction, hard brake) to a comfortable brake (quick reaction, 
gentle brake).
4.2.2. 2. Weather conditions. Weather conditions are also an 
important factor affecting the braking risk-avoidance strat­
egy. Research shows that fog absents a separate main effect 
on the six indicators of braking risk-avoidance strategy. 
There are two explanations for this phenomenon: First, it 
may be related to the level of fog. This paper only consid­
ered dense fog with visibility of 240 m. Whether there are 
significant differences under fog conditions with lower visi­
bility, needs to be further explored. Second, it may be that 
drivers are more attentive and careful in foggy weather (Wu 
et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2018). Drivers’ more cautious behav­
ior in fog may offset the reduction in driving performance 
caused by the reduced visibility. Although there is no signifi­
cant main effect, weather conditions and warning display 
types showed a significant interaction effect. HDD and 
HUD warnings improved the drivers’ braking risk-avoidance 
strategy under fog conditions, especially helping the driver 
to complete the perception decision stage earlier, leaving 
more space for the driver to adjust the manipulation behav­
ior. However, the failure to improve the final avoidance out­
come may be due to the milder braking process offsetting 
the advantages of the risk-avoidance result stage.
4.2.2.3. Driver attributes. Among the driver attributes, the 
main effect of gender on the six indicators of braking risk- 
avoidance strategy was not significant (Wu et al., 2018). 
3740
Y. ZHANG ET AL.

--- Page 19 ---
Compared to drivers with beginner driving experience who 
rarely drive, drivers with senior driving experience who 
drive every week tend to engage in braking behaviors later 
and more urgently. It is worth noting that compared to 
drivers with beginner driving experience, drivers with mid­
dle driving experience choose to take braking action earlier 
and complete danger avoidance earlier. The warning display 
types have different effects on drivers with different attrib­
utes. In this regard, HUD effectively improved females’ final 
risk-avoidance ability; HUD and HDD increased the driving 
confidence of drivers with middle driving experience and 
enabled them to choose more confident braking avoidance 
strategies (Luzuriaga et al., 2022).
To sum up, at the application level, the application of 
HUD warning in emergencies is worth promoting, especially 
in high-risk scenarios where the driver’s line of sight is 
obstructed, such as hidden pedestrian crossing event outside 
the zebra crossing. When the driver’s perception and deci­
sion abilities decrease due to external conditions (such as 
foggy weather), the setting of HDD and HUD warnings will 
be more valuable. In the promotion process of HUD, it is 
recommended to provide pre use training for drivers to 
increase their trust and familiarity with HUD warnings. At 
the same time, different warning forms and timing can be 
set for drivers with different attributes to meet the personal­
ized needs of each driver. Before HUD can be widely pro­
moted, it is necessary to conduct sufficient effectiveness 
testing on HUD. Additionally, during the testing process, 
the impact of HUD warning on driver perception and deci­
sion, risk-avoidance manipulation, and risk-avoidance result 
stages should be considered. At least 1–2 appropriate indica­
tors should be selected for each stage, such as position of 
accelerator pedal release and position of first braking (per­
ception and decision stage), braking distance and maximum 
deceleration (risk-avoidance manipulation stage), minimum 
conflict distance or position of minimum speed (risk-avoid­
ance result stage), etc.
4.3. Limitations and future research
This paper also has the following limitations and related 
work to be done in the future. First, with the development 
of augmented reality (AR), as a new visual display type, AR- 
HUD has recently been used to release navigation informa­
tion or warning information, and it has been considered 
that it may play a greater role in the future (Fremont et al., 
2020; Hwang et al., 2015; Schwarz & Fastenmeier, 2017). 
This paper only studies HDD and HUD, and the influence 
of AR-HUD will be studied in the future. Second, fog was 
often used in previous studies as a typical case of reduced 
visibility. This paper has explored the impact of dense fog 
on driver braking risk-avoidance strategies. In the future, 
research on different levels of foggy weather and other 
adverse weather conditions (e.g., rain and snow) can be 
added. The third is the difference between the experimental 
results of the driving simulator and the real-vehicle test. 
This difference is inevitable, but it can be reduced by cali­
bration. In the future, we can calibrate this difference 
through real-vehicle testing, and the experimental results 
after calibration will be more realistic. Finally, the learning 
effect is also a common issue in driving simulation experi­
ments. Although the learning effect of this paper is not sig­
nificant and will not affect the experimental results through 
testing, it still exists. In future experiments, we can try to 
avoid learning effects as much as possible by increasing the 
complexity of the scenario and the rest time of the driver. 
And the learning effect will be measured through subjective 
questionnaires as an auxiliary measure.
5. Conclusion
In the high-risk scenario of hidden pedestrian crossing event 
outside the zebra crossing, this paper studied the influence 
of three warning display types (Baseline/HDD/HUD) com­
bined with two weather conditions (clear weather/foggy wea­
ther) on a driver’s braking risk-avoidance strategy. It also 
considered the driver’s attributes as factors. The driving 
behavior data of thirty-four participants were obtained 
through a driving simulator. Based on the description of the 
process, an index system of braking risk-avoidance strategies 
was established. A GLMM was used to explore the influence 
of different factors (warning display types, weather condi­
tions and driver attributes) on the six indicators, the differ­
ences between different levels of the same factor, and the 
interaction effects between different factors.
‹ The results showed that warning display types, driving 
experience and driving frequency had a significant main effect 
on the braking risk-avoidance strategy. Compared to the 
Baseline conditions and HDD warning, HUD warning helps 
drivers 
choose 
the 
optimal 
risk 
avoidance 
strategy. 
Specifically, the drivers reacted at positions closer to the start­
ing point; braked more smoothly and gently; and maintained 
a greater safety margin between themselves and the pedes­
trian. Drivers with senior driving experience and who drive 
every week tended to spend more time in the perception and 
decision stage to observe the changes in the hazard.
› Warning display type and weather conditions, driving 
experience and driving frequency showed interaction effects 
on braking and risk-avoidance strategies. The HUD and 
HDD in foggy weather significantly improved the driver’s 
perception and decision ability. Females braked more 
urgently and completed risk-avoidance earlier when using 
HUD. Drivers with middle driving experience tended to 
adopt confident strategies when using HDD. Warning dis­
play types may be particularly useful for inclement weather 
and different types of drivers.
The contribution of this paper can be summarized as the 
following three points: First of all, the HUD test platform in 
the connected environment constructed by the driving simu­
lator can be widely used to test the HUD effectiveness in 
other safety-critical events (e.g., left-side vehicle merging 
and conflict with turning left), and it can also be used to 
carry out AR-HUD related tests in the future. Secondly, 
based on the detailed description of the braking risk-avoid­
ance process under pedestrian crossing events outside the 
zebra crossing, an index system for studying the braking 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
3741

--- Page 20 ---
risk-avoidance strategy was constructed. Ultimately, a gen­
eral research method for testing and evaluating the effective­
ness of the HUD warning system in such braking risk- 
avoidance events was formed. The research results support 
the development and implementation of design regulations 
for HUD, provide a reference for the rationalization and 
personalized design of HUD warning systems.
Disclosure statement
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influ­
ence the work reported in this paper.
Funding
This study is supported by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation 
Fengtai Rail Transit Frontier Research Joint Foundation (Grant No. 
ZD038001202201).
References
Abdel-Aty, M., Ekram, A. A., Huang, H., & Choi, K. (2011). A study 
on crashes related to visibility obstruction due to fog and smoke. 
Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 43(5), 1730–1737. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.aap.2011.04.003
Abdel-Aty, M., Pande, A., Lee, C., Gayah, V., & Santos, C. D. (2007). 
Crash risk assessment using intelligent transportation systems data 
and real-time intervention strategies to improve safety on freeways. 
Journal of Intelligent Transportation Systems, 11(3), 107–120. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/15472450701410395
Ablaßmeier, M., Poitschke, T., Wallhoff, F., Bengler, K., Rigoll, G. 
(2007). Eye gaze studies comparing head-up and head-down displays 
in vehicles. In Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE International Conference 
on Multimedia and Expo, ICME 2007, 2250–2252. https://doi.org/10. 
1109/icme.2007.4285134
ACI-ISTAT Incidenti stradali 2017 (2017). ACI-ISTAT Incidenti stra­
dali 2017. www.istat.it/it/files//2018/07/Incidenti-stradali_ 2017.pdf 
(in Italian)
Adavikottu, A., & Velaga, N. R. (2023). Analysis of speed reductions 
and crash risk of aggressive drivers during emergent pre-crash scen­
arios 
at 
unsignalized 
intersections. 
Accident; 
Analysis 
and 
Prevention, 187, 107088. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2023.107088
Ahmed, M. M., Yang, G., & Gaweesh, S. (2020). Assessment of drivers’ 
perceptions of connected vehicle–human machine interface for driv­
ing under adverse weather conditions: preliminary findings from 
Wyoming. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 1889. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fpsyg.2020.01889
Ali, Y., Sharma, A., Haque, M. M., Zheng, Z., & Saifuzzaman, M. 
(2020). The impact of the connected environment on driving behav­
ior and safety: A driving simulator study. Accident; Analysis and 
Prevention, 144, 105643. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2020.105643
Aust, M. L., Engstr€om, J., & Vistr€om, M. (2013). Effects of forward col­
lision warning and repeated event exposure on emergency braking. 
Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 
18, 34–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2012.12.010
Boda, C. N., Dozza, M., Bohman, K., Thalya, P., Larsson, A., & Lubbe, 
N. (2018). Modelling how drivers respond to a bicyclist crossing 
their path at an intersection: How do test track and driving simula­
tor compare? Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 111, 238–250. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2017.11.032
Brijs, T., Mauriello, F., Montella, A., Galante, F., Brijs, K., & Ross, V. 
(2022). Studying the effects of an advanced driver-assistance system 
to improve safety of cyclists overtaking. Accident; Analysis and 
Prevention, 174, 106763. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2022.106763
Calvi, A., D’Amico, F., Ferrante, C., & Bianchini Ciampoli, L. (2020). 
Effectiveness of augmented reality warnings on driving behaviour 
whilst approaching pedestrian crossings: A driving simulator study. 
Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 147, 105760. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.aap.2020.105760
Chen, H., Zhao, X., Li, Z., Fu, Q., Wang, Q., & Zhao, L. (2024). 
Construction and analysis of driver takeover behavior modes based 
on situation awareness theory. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent 
Vehicles, 9(2), 4040–4054. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIV.2023.3280077
Chow, S. C., Shao, J., Wang, H., & Lokhnygina, Y. (2017). Sample size 
calculations in clinical research. Chapman and Hall/CRC. https:// 
doi.org/10.1201/9781315183084
Cicchino, J. B. (2017). Effectiveness of forward collision warning and 
autonomous emergency braking systems in reducing front-to-rear 
crash rates. Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 99(Pt A), 142–152. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2016.11.009
Crundall, D., Underwood, G., & Chapman, P. (1999). Driving experi­
ence and the functional field of view. Perception, 28(9), 1075–1087. 
https://doi.org/10.1068/p281075
Dozza, M., Boda, C. N., Jaber, L., Thalya, P., & Lubbe, N. (2020). How 
do drivers negotiate intersections with pedestrians? The importance 
of pedestrian time-to-arrival and visibility. Accident; Analysis and 
Prevention, 141, 105524. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2020.105524
Du, Z., Wang, S., Yang, L., Ni, Y., & Jiao, F. (2021). Experimental 
study on the efficacy of retroreflective rings in the curved freeways 
tunnels. Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology, 110(3), 
103813. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tust.2021.103813
Fei, Y., Chen, F., Yu, D. L., & Han, J. L. (2013). Linear and generalized 
linear mixed models and their statistical diagnosis.
Fisher, D. L., Rizzo, M., Caird, J. K., & Lee, J. D. (2011). Handbook of 
driving simulation for engineering, medicine, and psychology 
https://doi.org/10.1201/b10836-2
Fremont, V., Phan, M. T., & Thouvenin, I. (2020). Adaptive visual 
assistance system for enhancing the driver awareness of pedestrians. 
International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 36(9), 856– 
869. https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2019.1698220
Galante, F., Mauriello, F., Montella, A., Pernetti, M., Aria, M., & 
D’Ambrosio, A. (2010). Traffic calming along rural highways cross­
ing small urban communities: Driving simulator experiment. 
Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 42(6), 1585–1594. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.aap.2010.03.017
Gao, K., Tu, H., Sun, L., Sze, N. N., Song, Z., & Shi, H. (2020). 
Impacts of reduced visibility under hazy weather condition on colli­
sion risk and car-following behavior: Implications for traffic control 
and 
management. 
International 
Journal 
of 
Sustainable 
Transportation, 14(8), 635–642. https://doi.org/10.1080/15568318. 
2019.1597226
Hajiseyedjavadi, F., Zhang, T., Agrawal, R., Knodler, M., Fisher, D., & 
Samuel, S. (2018). Effectiveness of visual warnings on young drivers 
hazard anticipation and hazard mitigation abilities. Accident; 
Analysis and Prevention, 116, 41–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap. 
2017.11.037
Haque, M. M., Oviedo-Trespalacios, O., Sharma, A., & Zheng, Z. 
(2021). Examining the driver-pedestrian interaction at pedestrian 
crossings in the connected environment: A Hazard-based duration 
modelling approach. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and 
Practice, 150, 33–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2021.05.014
Hussain, Q., Alhajyaseen, W. K. M., Pirdavani, A., Reinolsmann, N., 
Brijs, K., & Brijs, T. (2019). Speed perception and actual speed in a 
driving simulator and real-world: A validation study. Transportation 
Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 62, 637–650. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2019.02.019
Hwang, Y., Park, B. J., & Kim, K. H. (2015). The effects of augmented- 
reality head-up display system on the perception of precautionary 
situation [Paper presentation]. In 2015 International Conference on 
Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC), 
October, pp. 1146–1148. IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICTC.2015. 
7354760
3742
Y. ZHANG ET AL.

--- Page 21 ---
Kudarauskas, N. (2007). Analysis of emergency braking of a vehicle. 
Transport, 22(3), 154–159. https://doi.org/10.1080/16484142.2007. 
9638118
Large, D. R., Kim, H., Merenda, C., Leong, S., Harvey, C., Burnett, G., 
& Gabbard, J. (2019). Investigating the effect of urgency and modal­
ity of pedestrian alert warnings on driver acceptance and perform­
ance. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and 
Behaviour, 60, 11–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2018.09.028
Lerman, J. (1996). Study design in clinical research: Sample size estima­
tion and power analysis. Canadian Journal of Anaesthesia, 43(2), 
184–191. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03011261
Li, R., Chen, Y. V., Zhang, L., Shen, Z., & Qian, Z. C. (2020). Effects of 
perception of head-up display on the driving safety of experienced 
and inexperienced drivers. Displays, 64, 101962. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.displa.2020.101962
Liu, Y. C. (2003). Effects of using head-up display in automobile con­
text on attention demand and driving performance. Displays, 24(4- 
5), 157–165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.displa.2004.01.001
Liu, Y. C., & Wen, M. H. (2004). Comparison of head-up display 
(HUD) vs. head-down display (HDD): Driving performance of com­
mercial vehicle operators in Taiwan. International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies, 61(5), 679–697. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhcs.2004.06.002
Luzuriaga, M., Aydogdu, S., & Schick, B. (2022). Boosting advanced 
driving information: A real-world experiment about the effect of 
HUD on HMI, driving effort, and safety. International Journal of 
Intelligent Transportation Systems Research, 20(1), 181–191. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s13177-021-00277-y
Lyu, N., Deng, C., Xie, L., Wu, C., & Duan, Z. (2019). A field oper­
ational test in China: Exploring the effect of an advanced driver 
assistance system on driving performance and braking behavior. 
Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 
65, 730–747. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2018.01.003
Maag, C., Kraft, A. K., Neukum, A., & Baumann, M. (2022). 
Supporting cooperative driving behaviour by technology – HMI 
solution, acceptance by drivers and effects on workload and driving 
behaviour. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and 
Behaviour, 84, 139–154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2021.11.017
Ministry of Public Security of the People’s Republic of China. (2020). 
33.28 million newly registered motor vehicles nationwide, and 4.92 
million new energy vehicles. https://app.mps.gov.cn/gdnps/pc/content. 
jsp?id=7647257&mtype¼
Mueller, A. S., & Trick, L. M. (2012). Driving in fog: The effects of 
driving experience and visibility on speed compensation and hazard 
avoidance. Accident Analysis and Prevention, 48(9), 472–479. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2012.03.003
Naujoks, F., & Neukum, A. (2014). Specificity and timing of advisory 
warnings based on cooperative perception. In Mensch & Computer 
2014 - Workshopband. https://doi.org/10.1524/9783110344509.229
Nelder, J. A., & Wedderburn, R. W. M. (1972). Generalized Linear 
Models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 135(3), 370–384. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2344614
Pfannm€uller, L., Kramer, M., Senner, B., & Bengler, K. (2015). A com­
parison of display concepts for a navigation system in an automotive 
contact analog head-up display. Procedia Manufacturing, 3, 2722– 
2729. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.678
Raddaoui, O., Ahmed, M. M., & Gaweesh, S. M. (2020). Assessment of 
the effectiveness of connected vehicle weather and work zone warn­
ings in improving truck driver safety. IATSS Research, 44(3), 230– 
237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iatssr.2020.01.001
Retting, R, GHSA (2020). Pedestrian traffic fatalities by state: 2019 pre­
liminary data. February 2020.
Ross, V., Reinolsmann, N., Dehman, A., Van Vlierden, K., Mollu, K., 
De Bisschop, E., Ectors, W., & Brijs, T. (2021). Investigating the 
effect of marking and delineation treatments on driver behavior at 
highway exit gore areas. Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 161, 
106362. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2021.106362
Schwarz, F., & Fastenmeier, W. (2017). Augmented reality warnings in 
vehicles: Effects of modality and specificity on effectiveness. 
Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 101, 55–66. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.aap.2017.01.019
Strayer, D. L., Cooper, J. M., Goethe, R. M., McCarty, M. M., Getty, 
D. J., & Biondi, F. (2019). Assessing the visual and cognitive demands 
of in-vehicle information systems. Cognitive Research: principles and 
Implications, 4(1), 18. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41235-019-0166-3
Winkler, S., Kazazi, J., & Vollrath, M. (2015). Distractive or supportive- 
how warnings in the head-up display affect drivers’ gaze and driving 
behavior 
[Paper 
presentation]. 
In 
IEEE 
18th 
International 
Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, pp. 10351040. 
IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ITSC.2015.172
Winkler, S., Kazazi, J., & Vollrath, M. (2018a). How to warn drivers in 
various safety-critical situations – Different strategies, different reac­
tions. Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 117, 410–426. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.aap.2018.01.040
Winkler, S., Kazazi, J., & Vollrath, M. (2018b). Practice makes better – 
Learning effects of driving with a multi-stage collision warning. 
Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 117, 398–409. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.aap.2018.01.018
Wu, C., Ma, S., & Zhuang, X. (2013). Cognitive psychological process 
and model of pedestrian’s road crossing behavior. Advances in 
Psychological Science, 21(7), 1141–1149. https://doi.org/10.3969/j.issn. 
1003-3033.2011.04.004
Wu, Y., Abdel-Aty, M., Cai, Q., Lee, J., & Park, J. (2018). Developing 
an algorithm to assess the rear-end collision risk under fog condi­
tions using real-time data. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging 
Technologies, 87, 11–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2017.12.012
Wu, Y., Abdel-Aty, M., Park, J., & Selby, R. M. (2018). Effects of real- 
time warning systems on driving under fog conditions using an 
empirically 
supported 
speed 
choice 
modeling 
framework. 
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 86, 97–110. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2017.10.025
Wu, Y., Abdel-Aty, M., Park, J., & Zhu, J. (2018). Effects of crash 
warning systems on rear-end crash avoidance behavior under fog 
conditions. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 
95, 481–492. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2018.08.001
Yan, X., Li, X., Liu, Y., & Zhao, J. (2014). Effects of foggy conditions 
on drivers’ speed control behaviors at different risk levels. Safety 
Science, 68(2014), 275–287. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2014.04.013
Yang, W., Zhang, X., Lei, Q., & Cheng, X. (2019). Research on longitu­
dinal active collision avoidance of autonomous emergency braking 
pedestrian system (AEB-P). Sensors (Basel, Switzerland), 19(21), 
4671. https://doi.org/10.3390/s19214671
Yang, Z., Shi, J., Zhang, Y., Wang, D., Li, H., Wu, C., Zhang, Y., & 
Wan, J. (2019). Head-up display graphic warning system facilitates 
simulated driving performance. International Journal of Human– 
Computer 
Interaction, 
35(9), 
796–803. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
10447318.2018.1496970
Yeung, J. S., & Wong, Y. D. (2015). Effects of driver age and experi­
ence in abrupt-onset hazards. Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 78, 
110–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2015.02.024
Yue, L., Abdel-Aty, M., Wu, Y., & Wang, L. (2018). Assessment of the 
safety benefits of vehicles’ advanced driver assistance, connectivity 
and low level automation systems. Accident; Analysis and 
Prevention, 117, 55–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2018.04.002
Yue, L., Abdel-Aty, M., Wu, Y., Yuan, J., & Morris, M. (2020). 
Influence of pedestrian-to-vehicle technology on drivers’ response 
and safety benefits considering pre-crash conditions. Transportation 
Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 73, 50–65. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2020.06.012
Zhang, Y., Yan, X., Wu, J., & Duan, K. (2020). Effect of warning sys­
tem on interactive driving behavior at unsignalized intersection 
under fog conditions: A study based on multiuser driving simula­
tion. Journal of Advanced Transportation, 2020, 1–16. https://doi. 
org/10.1155/2020/8871875
Zhao, X., Chen, H., Li, H., Li, X., Chang, X., Feng, X., & Chen, Y. 
(2021). Development and application of connected vehicle technol­
ogy test platform based on driving simulator: Case study. Accident; 
Analysis and Prevention, 161, 106330. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap. 
2021.106330
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
3743

--- Page 22 ---
Zhao, X., Chen, H., Li, Z., Li, H., Gong, J., & Fu, Q. (2022). Influence 
characteristics of automated driving takeover behavior in different 
scenarios. China Journal of Highway and Transport, 35(9), 20. 
https://doi.org/10.19721/j.cnki.1001-7372.2022.09.015
Zhao, X., Li, X., Chen, Y., Li, H., & Ding, Y. (2021b). Evaluation of fog 
warning system on driving under heavy fog condition based on 
driving simulator. Journal of Intelligent and Connected Vehicles, 4(2), 
41–51. https://doi.org/10.1108/JICV-11-2020-0012
About the authors
Yu Zhang received the BS degree in transportation engineering from 
ShanDong JiaoTong University, Shangdong, China, in 2021. She is cur­
rently pursuing the MS degree in transportation engineering at Beijing 
University of Technology, Beijing, China. Her main research interests 
include human-computer interaction, driving behavior and traffic 
safety.
Yang Bian received the MS and PhD degree in transportation engin­
eering and transportation planning and management from Southeast 
University, Nangjing, China, in 2002 and 2007, respectively. Her main 
research interests include pedestrian and bicycle traffic behavior and 
planning design, as well as optimization design of traffic information 
assistance systems.
Xiaohua Zhao received the PhD degree in pattern recognition and 
intelligent system from Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, 
China, in 2001. At present, she is the author or co-author of 191 aca­
demic papers in tenure and the first author of 151 academic papers.
Xuewei Li received the MS and PhD degree in traffic and transporta­
tion engineering from Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China, 
in 2018 and 2023, respectively. Her main research interests include 
driver assistance systems, driving behavior and traffic safety.
Jianhua Zhang received the MS degree in transportation engineering 
from Chongqing Jiaotong University, Chongqing, China, in 2019. He is 
currently pursuing the PhD degree in transportation engineering at 
Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, China. His research interests 
include intelligent transportation, driving behavior & traffic safety, and 
traffic information & control.
3744
Y. ZHANG ET AL.
