--- Page 1 ---
Distractive or supportive – how warnings in the head-
up display affect drivers’ gaze and driving behavior 
 
Susann Winkler, Juela Kazazi & Mark Vollrath 
Department of Traffic and Engineering Psychology 
Technische Universität Braunschweig 
Braunschweig, Germany 
 
 
Abstract— Urban areas expose drivers to a lot of challenges 
(e.g., many kinds of distracting stimuli and road users) and 
critical situations, increasing the probability of driver errors. 
Therefore the accident rate in urban areas is quite high and 
driver assistance is needed. As part of the research project 
UR:BAN, this study investigates the effectiveness of four 
different types of driver warnings (+ control group), presented in 
a head-up display (HUD), to support drivers in a very critical 
urban scenario. The aim of these driver warnings was to alert 
drivers to a forthcoming pedestrian crossing the ego vehicle’s 
road, eliciting a fast and strong response from the drivers like an 
emergency brake. The driver warnings varied in their strategy 
(attention vs. reaction oriented) and specificity (generic vs. 
specific). In a driving simulation the drivers’ gaze and driving 
behavior were analyzed. A total of sixty drivers were tested in a 
between-subjects design (27 female, 33 male; M = 23.7 years, 
SD = 3.7 years). In general, all driver warnings affected the 
drivers’ performance positively. Even though the number of 
collisions was not reduced, drivers showed a faster and stronger 
brake reaction when being warned, which nevertheless reduced 
the collision severity. While all drivers gazed at the safety-critical 
object, only about half of the drivers showed a HUD glance. 
When the drivers gazed at the HUD, the positive effect of the 
driver warnings on the brake reaction time was reduced. Thus, 
driver warnings which do not have to be fixated in order to be 
perceived are an interesting perspective for future research. 
Furthermore, the warning types differed little from each other in 
their effects on the drivers’ performance. However, one warning, 
which was somewhat more unusual and difficult to understand, 
was least effective. This shows that a bad design of a warning can 
negate the potential benefits. Overall, the examined driver 
warnings can be recommended for very critical situations as they 
improved the drivers’ performance and did not distract them. 
However, not all driver warnings are equally well suited. 
Keywords— driver warning; accident prevention; driving and 
gaze behavior; head-up display; urban area 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Urban areas and their complex driving situations are a big 
challenge to drivers. They are confronted with numerous 
distracting stimuli and high information density, combined 
with short decision times. Additionally, the interaction between 
various road users (vehicles, pedestrians, bicyclists) is at its 
maximum here. Thus, many critical situations arise in urban 
areas, combined with driver errors this result in a large number 
of accidents. Assisting drivers here is of great importance and 
thus is also aim of the research project UR:BAN. The 
following study, as being part of this project, investigates the 
effectiveness of different visual driver warning concepts in 
supporting drivers in critical urban situations. 
Recent research concentrates on developing methods to 
detect objects (e.g., pedestrians, bicyclists, obstacles) in the 
driving environment and assess the hazard they present in order 
to trigger driver (collision) warnings if needed [1]. Aim of 
these is to alert drivers to the impending critical situation so 
that they can react adequately such as by braking or swerving. 
For example, in a very critical situation with imminent 
collision risk, driver warnings should elicit a fast and strong 
brake reaction from drivers that could reduce the occurrence 
and severity of accidents. In order to achieve this, the design of 
driver warnings becomes very important. 
First of all, driver warnings have to be perceived by drivers. 
For that purpose they should be salient enough to attract 
drivers’ glances even in time-critical situations, but without 
distracting the drivers from the road and the critical situation. 
This brings the head-up display (HUD) into focus as a location 
for driver warnings. As compared to head-down displays 
(HDD) like instrument panels [2] [3] or center column displays 
[4], the HUD projects warnings into the windshield. Thus, 
drivers can perceive them in their field of view, overlapping 
the road reality, which means shorter eye accommodation 
times and shorter gaze retention times than instrument panels 
[5] or center column displays [4]. Furthermore, displaying 
driver warnings in the HUD lessens the chances of overseeing 
a critical event in the environment and saves time for the 
drivers to react upon such [6]. 
However, driver warnings should not capture the drivers’ 
glance for too long, which might occur if drivers do not 
immediately understand the warnings, perhaps causing them to 
be distracted from the actual critical situation and slowing 
down their reaction. Hence, driver warnings should be 
designed in a way that drivers can perceive them promptly, 
understand the enclosed information intuitively and process it 
rapidly [7] in order to assess the critical situation appropriately. 
This is supported by [8], who found an increase in driver 
reaction and detection times upon changes with increasing 
cognitive demand of warnings. As traffic signs are well known 
to all drivers from driver license training and everyday traffic, 
their use as driver warnings might help drivers to process and 
2015 IEEE 18th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems
978-1-4673-6596-3/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ITSC.2015.172
1035

--- Page 2 ---
understand critical situations better, supporting them optimally 
to select and trigger an adequate reaction [9] [10] [11] [12]. 
In very critical scenarios the time left to prevent a collision 
with a safety-critical object is limited. During this short time 
one might concentrate primarily on raising and/or guiding the 
drivers’ attention in order to improve the understanding of the 
critical situation (attention oriented), while another warning 
strategy might skip this step and try to elicit automatic driver 
responses (reaction oriented). Furthermore, the specificity of 
the driver warnings may matter. Being specific, they might 
provide drivers with additional details about the critical 
situation like the safety-critical object involved (e.g., pedestrian 
or bicyclist) or the optimal reaction choice (e.g., braking or 
steering). In contrast, driver warnings could also be generic to 
avoid the presentation of information which might take drivers 
too much time to process and thus slow down their reaction. 
Each warning strategy (attention vs. reaction oriented) in its 
specificity (generic vs. specific) has advantages and 
disadvantages. For example, generic driver warnings may lack 
important details for the understanding of the situation leading 
to confusion and thus increasing reaction times or they might 
immediately trigger an automatic driver reaction like 
emergency braking and thus save time. Aim of this paper is to 
analyze which warning type would be most effective in 
supporting drivers in critical urban situations. 
Exemplary for a very critical urban situation a pedestrian 
crossing scenario is used in this study, as this type of accident 
leads to the most deaths in urban areas (26.8% of all fatal 
accidents in German urban areas in 2013 [13]). The scenario 
only leaves enough time for a late warning timing, additionally 
contributing to its high criticality. In this situation driver 
distraction through the warnings (e.g., by guiding the drivers’ 
glance away from the relevant scene) might have the most 
negative impact. If the proposed driver warnings show positive 
effects over no warning even in this highly critical situation, 
they could be recommended in general. Therefore this scenario 
is analyzed in detail in this paper, while the other seven 
scenarios, examined for drivers to experience the warning in 
diverse situations, will be reported in a further paper. 
To summarize, in this driving simulator study the effects of 
four different driver warnings in the HUD were analyzed in a 
pedestrian crossing scenario. The aim of this paper is to give a 
detailed analysis of the drivers’ performance after warning 
presentation. Special interest lies on how the different warning 
types influence the attention processes measured by eye-
tracking and how that affects the brake reactions. Positive 
effects of every warning type over no warning were expected, 
as well as differences in the driving and gaze behavior due the 
warning type (varied in warning strategy and specificity). 
II. METHODS 
A. Driver warnings 
Drivers were supported by visual warnings in form of 
traffic signs displayed in a multicolor HUD. As any additional 
acoustic or haptic warning signal might have masked the visual 
effects of the different warning types, the driver warnings were 
exclusively given visually. They were projected into the 
windshield overlapping with the scenery. Presented driver-
centered, right above the engine hood, measuring maximum 
21x21 cm (6° visual angle), they were triggered as the safety-
critical object started moving (around 1.66 s before its crossing 
point with the ego vehicle). Moreover, the driver warnings 
varied in their strategy (reaction vs. attention oriented) and 
specificity (generic vs. specific). In sum, four different warning 
types were generated (see Table I). As reaction oriented 
generic (RG) warning, a stop sign was to elicit an immediate 
brake reaction by the drivers, while the reaction oriented 
specific (RS) warning displayed a stop sign for brake reactions 
or a swerving sign when steering reactions were more 
beneficial like in the analyzed scenario. In the attention 
oriented generic (AG) warning the drivers’ general attention 
was to be raised by a caution sign, whereas in the attention 
specific (AS) warning the triangle included the current safety-
critical object (a pedestrian in the analyzed scenario) in order to 
guide the drivers’ attention directly towards it. Table I shows 
all implemented warning types as well as the control group (C), 
receiving no warning at all. 
TABLE I.  
IMPLEMENTED WARNING VISUALIZATIONS IN THE HUD WITH 
THE WARNING TYPES PRESENTED IN THE VERY CRITICAL SCENARIO IN COLOR 
Warning type 
Presentation in head-up display 
1) Control (C) 
No warning 
2) Reaction generic (RG) 
3) Reaction specific (RS) 
4) Attention generic (AG) 
5) Attention specific (AS) 
B. Scenario and simulator 
The study was conducted in the fixed base medium fidelity 
driving simulator of the Technische Universität Braunschweig. 
It consists of a seat box with typical car interiors like a steering 
wheel with force feedback, accelerator and brake pedals as 
well as two LCD screens serving as rear-view mirrors. The 
virtual urban scenery created by the driving simulation 
software SILAB 3.0 (from WIVW [14]; see www.wivw.de) is 
projected onto three silver screens (left, ahead, right), 
providing the drivers with a 180° field of view at about 2.1 m 
distance from the driver’s seat. In the examined very critical 
driving scenario the ego vehicle was driving straight ahead 
with 50 km/h on a one-way road with a free green area to the 
left and a long row of parking cars to the right, when suddenly 
a pedestrian crossed the ego vehicle’s path from right to left. 
The pedestrian was occluded from sight by a small van before 
starting to cross. It was activated to a speed of 2 m/s as soon as 
the drivers passed a fixed point (hedgehog) in the simulated 
scene, being around 23 m before the pedestrian crossing point. 
Drivers had to react immediately, either by very strong braking 
or swerving onto the green area in order to avoid an imminent 
collision with the pedestrian. Although both reactions would 
have been efficient, all drivers braked, whereas almost no one 
swerved. So the analysis will focus on the braking behavior. 
The research is supported by the German Federal Ministry for Economic 
Affairs and Energy on the basis of a decision by the German Bundestag 
1036

--- Page 3 ---
C. Participants 
In total, sixty drivers (27 female, 33 male) participated in 
the experiment (Mean (M) = 23.7 years, Standard Deviation 
(SD) = 3.7 years). They were recruited through flyers, mailing 
lists and an existing pool of trained simulator drivers. The 
average driving experience was 5.7 years (SD = 3.6 years) and 
the annual mileage was mainly less than 3000 km. All 
participants had normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity. 
Simulator training was required for participation in order to 
avoid simulation sickness. Drivers were compensated with 12 € 
for a successful participation or received course credits (if 
students at the Technische Universität Braunschweig). 
D. Procedure 
After a welcome, participants were instructed in written 
form about the experiment’s objectives. They signed a consent 
form and filled in a demographic questionnaire. To familiarize 
the drivers with the simulator, they absolved an about 15 min 
training drive in the simulator. Subsequently equipped with the 
Dikablis glance tracking glasses, they started the actual test 
drive with in sum eight different critical situations. After the 
first test drive, a small break was offered, before the second 
test drive started. Both test drives included the same scenarios, 
however in randomized orders. In the end, the participants 
were interviewed about the driver warnings and their usability 
and thanked for their participation as well as compensated. The 
entire experiment took approximately one and a half hour. 
E. Data and data analysis 
For the experiment, a between-subjects design was used. 
Each driver experienced one warning type in the critical 
situation. Accordingly, there were five groups, a control group 
without a warning and four warning groups receiving different 
warning types (warning types: no warning (C), reaction 
oriented generic (RG), reaction oriented specific (RS), 
attention oriented generic (AG), attention oriented specific 
(AS), see Table I). The paper analyzes gaze (Dikablis) and 
driving behavior data (SILAB) separately and in combination 
focusing on the results of the first test drive. Table II gives an 
overview of the measured variables analyzed in this paper. 
TABLE II.  
ANALYZED VARIABLES 
Variable 
Unit 
Description of variable 
AOI glance 
- 
Number of drivers who gazed at an area of 
interest (AOI: safety-critical object or HUD) 
for at least 0.1 s 
AOI glance 
duration 
s 
Time period in which an AOI (safety-critical 
object or HUD) is fixated 
AOI glance 
reaction time 
s 
Time from warning onset until AOI (safety-
critical object or HUD) fixation 
Number of 
collisions 
- 
Number of incidents, when the ego vehicle 
collided with the crossing pedestrian 
Brake reaction 
time 
s 
Time from warning onset until pressing of 
the brake pedal 
Maximum 
braking value 
% 
Maximum pressing of the brake pedal after 
warning onset in percent of the sample 
maximum before pedestrian crossing point 
For inferential statistical data analysis IBM SPSS Statistics 
22 was used. When applicable a general linear model with the 
between-subjects factor warning type or a t-test with the factor 
HUD glance was conducted. For the number of collisions a 
chi-squared test was computed. A significance level of alpha 
p = .05 was adopted for all statistical tests. In all other cases 
descriptive analyses are reported, especially for all data 
concerning the HUD glance due to a reduced number of 
participants (N), who actually gazed at the HUD. This will be 
explained in detail in the following section. 
III. RESULTS 
A. Gaze behavior 
The analysis of the gaze behavior showed that all drivers 
sooner or later gazed at the safety-critical object (CO). The 
HUD however, was gazed at before brake initiation by only 
45.8% of all drivers who received a warning (N = 22). The 
HUD glance distribution over the warning groups was quite 
equal, with about half of the drivers within each warning group 
gazing at the HUD (HUD glance before brake initiation for 
RG: N = 6, RS: N = 5, AG: N = 5, AS: N = 6). Some more 
HUD glances occurred after drivers began to brake, especially 
in the RG warning (HUD glance after brake initiation for RG: 
N = 5, RS: N = 1, AG: N = 1, AS: N = 1). However, in this 
paper the HUD glances before brake initiation are focused as 
this is the critical phase with the most distraction potential of 
the driver warnings. 
Inferential statistical analyses of the CO glance showed no 
significant main effects of the warning type, neither for the CO 
glance reaction time (F(4,55) = 0.32, p = .867) nor the CO glance 
duration (F(4,55) = 1.46, p = .228). Overall, the mean CO glance 
reaction time was about 0.36 s (SD = 0.28 s) and the mean 
glance duration about 1.72 s (SD = 0.91 s). However, when 
directly comparing the single warning types with the control 
group, the RG warning had a noticeably lower CO glance 
duration compared to the control group (C-RG: p = .022) and 
in sum the lowest of all warning groups (C: M = 2.10 s, 
SD = 1.04 s; RG: M = 1.23 s, SD = 0.74 s). 
The HUD glances were only analyzed in the four warning 
groups since no driver warnings were presented in the HUD for 
the control group. As described above, only five to six drivers 
within every warning group gazed at the HUD at all. Due to the 
thereby limited number of participants, statistical analyses 
became critical. Overall, it took drivers on average about 0.18 s 
(SD = 0.11 s) to gaze at the HUD. Additionally, these glances 
lasted on average about 0.24 s (SD = 0.12 s). Regarding the 
means per warning type, the groups were quite similar except 
for the RS warning. It led to the shortest HUD glance reaction 
times (M = 0.04 s, SD = 0.07 s), with the glances of three 
drivers resting already coincidentally on the HUD before the 
warning was visible. Additionally, the HUD glances upon the 
RS warning lasted the longest (M = 0.35 s, SD = 0.10 s). 
B. Number of collisions 
To analyze the effect of the warning type on the number of 
collisions, a chi-squared (X²) test was conducted. As can be 
seen in Fig. 1, there were no overall significant differences in 
the number of collisions due to the warning type (X² = 1.60, 
1037

--- Page 4 ---
p = .808). About half of the drivers encountered an accident in 
total (n = 31) as well as within every group (see Fig. 1). 
Fig. 1 further shows the effect of the HUD glance on the 
number of collisions. In another chi-squared test over all 
warning types the numbers of collisions did not differ 
significantly due to the HUD glance either (X² = 3.02, 
p = .082; share of collisions with HUD glance for RG: 80.0%; 
RS: 57.1%; AG: 42.9%; AS: 60%). Furthermore, Fig. 1 shows 
the effect of the warning type on the number of collisions for 
drivers who showed a HUD glance and for those who did not. 
The absolute number of collisions with HUD glance as well as 
its relation to the absolute number of collisions avoided with 
HUD glance was relatively similar between the warning groups 
(see Fig. 1). Thus, no general warning type effect on the 
number of collisions depending on the HUD glance is 
noticeable. 
 
Fig. 1. Number of collisions for the control and all four warning groups with 
and without head-up display (HUD) glance, displaying the number of 
participants (N) included in the bottom of the bars. 
C. Brake reaction time (Starting to brake) 
In order to investigate the influence of the warning type on 
the brake reaction time, a general linear model with the factor 
warning type was conducted. It showed a significant overall 
effect of the warning type on the brake reaction time 
(F(4,55) = 2.54, p = .050). Driving with a warning improved the 
brake reaction time compared to no warning (see Fig. 2), 
reaching some significant time improvements in post-hoc tests. 
The RG and AS warning both led to significantly faster brake 
reactions than the control group (C-RG: p = .019; C-AS: 
p = .004). For the AG warning, there was a tendency of an 
effect (C-AG: p = .052), while the RS warning did not differ 
significantly from the control group (C-RS: p =.139). 
Furthermore, the t-test over all warning groups showed a 
significant main effect of the HUD glance on the brake 
reaction time (t(46) = -2.12, p = .039). As can be seen in Fig. 2, 
independent of the warning type drivers gazing at the HUD 
reacted slower (M = 0.90, SD = 0.12) than drivers disregarding 
the HUD (M = 0.82 s, SD = 0.14). Yet, only in the RS warning 
group the positive effect of the driver warnings improving the 
brake reaction time was evened out, when drivers gazed at the 
HUD. However, the HUD glance still did not delay the brake 
reaction compared to the control group either. 
 
Fig. 2. Mean brake reaction time for the control and all four warning groups 
with and without head-up display (HUD) glance, displaying the number 
of participants (N) included in the bottom of the bars. 
D. Maximum braking value (Braking process) 
Besides reacting fast, it is also important to brake strong 
enough so that a collision can be avoided. As a measure of this 
aspect, the maximum braking value was examined by 
conducting a general linear model with the factor warning type. 
It showed that the maximum braking value varies significantly 
with the warning type (F(4,55) = 3.90, p = .007). As can be seen 
in Fig. 3, except for the RS warning, all driver warnings led to 
a higher maximum braking value than no warning as in the 
control group, reaching significance in post-hoc tests (C-RG: 
p = .012; C-RS: p = .694; C-AG: p = .043; C-AS: p = .026). 
The RS maximum braking value was also significantly lower 
than in the other three warning groups (RS-RG: p = .004; RS-
AG: p = .017; RS-AS: p = .010). 
 
Fig. 3. Mean maximum braking value for the control and all four warning 
groups with and without head-up display (HUD) glance, displaying the 
number of participants (N) included in the bottom of the bars. 
Moreover, according to another t-test over all warning 
groups there was no difference in the maximum braking value 
due to whether the drivers gazed at the HUD or not 
(t(46) = 0.67, p = .506; without HUD glance: M = 91.25%, 
SD = 14.51%; with HUD glance: M = 87.60%, SD = 22.89%). 
1038

--- Page 5 ---
IV. DISCUSSION 
This paper presents an explorative analysis on how 
different types of driver warnings in the HUD affect drivers’ 
performance (driving and gaze behavior) in a very critical 
pedestrian crossing scenario. The aim is to create driver 
warnings which most drivers recognize, understand easily and 
process rapidly in order to reduce the accident rate and severity 
in urban areas. An immediate emergency brake or swerving 
onto the green area would have been ideal as a driver response 
in the examined scenario. However, all but one driver (not 
even receiving the RS warning) reacted by braking, since the 
swerving sign might have not been familiar to the drivers. 
Before discussing the results, some limitations have to be 
mentioned. First of all, the drivers knew that critical situations 
might occur through instructions and after encountering the 
first scenario themselves. Thereby drivers were more alert than 
perhaps in everyday traffic, to which the laboratory 
environment additionally contributed [15]. This reduced the 
effect of surprise, which drivers would experience in the field. 
However, the diversity of the altogether eight critical scenarios 
included in this study (different safety-critical objects and 
locations) made it hard to guess what might happen next. Still 
drivers knew they were being supported by a driver warning 
system and that the study aimed at evaluating it, so they might 
have been also more alert for warnings in general. This might 
have influenced the gaze behavior. For example, drivers’ 
glances might have frequented the HUD more often than they 
normally would and thus already lasting there when the 
warning was triggered in the first place. In addition, the driver 
warnings occurred rather frequently, far more than in real 
traffic. However, all these circumstances were practical 
experimental necessities. Furthermore, when interpreting the 
results, it has to be taken into account that the number of 
analyzed participants (each of the five groups: N = 12) was 
limited in this study due to (many potential participants being 
excluded from the experiment as a result of) simulation 
sickness 
and 
experiencing 
many 
critical 
scenarios 
consecutively being quite stressful for participants. 
In general, warning drivers visually in very time critical 
situations might be questionable as the warning visualization 
might distract drivers, for example in guiding the drivers’ 
glance onto the warning visualization and capturing it for too 
long to the cost of the actual safety-critical object being 
disregarded. However, in the analyzed scenario all drivers 
gazed at the safety-critical object regardless of whether they 
had received a warning or not. Moreover, the glance reaction 
time and the glance duration on the safety-critical object did 
not differ significantly. Thus, it seems that the examined driver 
warnings did not distract the drivers from recognizing the 
safety-critical object, which is also substantiated by the fact 
that most drivers (around 71%) had their critical object glance 
before their HUD glance. 
With regard to the head-up display, in total 45.8% of the 
warned drivers showed a HUD glance before beginning to 
brake (N = 22). The glance reaction times were quite short 
(overall about 0.2 s) indicating that the driver warnings had 
probably automatically attracted the drivers’ attention. 
Additionally, the glances on the HUD also lasted quite short 
supporting the idea that the examined warning visualizations 
were well-known as it did not take drivers extensively long to 
process or understand them. However, an exception was the 
reaction specific warning visualization, which was supposed to 
elicit a steering reaction from drivers. The glances at the HUD 
in this group lasted almost double as long as in the other three 
warning groups. It seems that this sign was less familiar or 
understandable than the other warning visualizations. It was 
also not very effective in general as it did not induce any driver 
to a steering reaction. Moreover, the RS warning type had the 
weakest effect on the brake reaction time and the maximum 
braking value as compared to the other warning groups. Thus, 
the use of well-known and easily understandable warning 
visualizations seems advisable to for such driver warnings. 
Since driver warnings aim at safer driving, the driving 
behavior was of special interest. While the warnings used in 
this study were not effective in significantly preventing 
accidents in the examined scenario, there were positive effects 
of the driver warnings with regard to the brake reaction time 
and maximum braking value. All driver warnings led to faster 
and stronger brake reactions. The fact that independent of 
whether drivers received a warning, still about half of the 
drivers encountered an accident (in total N = 31 collisions) also 
proves the high criticality of the scenario. As the driver 
warnings neither increased nor reduced the number of 
collisions, one might think that the driver warnings presented 
in the HUD were not seen by the drivers, but the gaze behavior 
data described above proved the opposite. Drivers did show 
HUD glances. 
However, when drivers gazed at the HUD before brake 
initiation the positive effect of the driver warnings with regard 
to the break reaction time seemed to be evened out as these 
drivers reached brake reaction times quite similar to the control 
group. In contrast, the positive effect of a stronger brake 
reaction induced by the driver warnings was independent of 
whether drivers showed a HUD glance or not. This difference 
between the two parameters might be due to the drivers, who 
gazed at the HUD after brake initiation and before reaching 
their maximum braking value (N = 8), being disregarded. Their 
inclusion might change the effects again and should thus be 
further analyzed. 
Yet regarding the negated benefit in the brake reaction 
time, one might assume that visual driver warnings in the HUD 
are more effective if they are perceived in the peripheral visual 
field, without directly attracting the drivers’ attention or 
glances, but rather enable them to focus on the outside world 
and its dangers. This might be an interesting approach for 
future studies on visual driver warnings. Furthermore, it might 
explain why the content or the different visualizations of the 
warning (with exception of the RS warning) did not seem to be 
crucial. Thus, warning drivers at all appears of importance, less 
what is displayed in the HUD, as long as it is well-known and 
easily understood by the drivers. As already discussed above, 
driver warnings with unfamiliar or complex visualizations 
might even lead to negative effects or at least negate the 
potential benefits. 
Concluding, in general the driver warnings had positive 
effects on the drivers’ performance. Even though the number 
1039

--- Page 6 ---
of collisions could not be reduced significantly by the driver 
warnings, probably also due to the limited time left to act at all, 
the collision severity was reduced due to faster and stronger 
brake reactions of the drivers, as intended by the driver 
warnings in this very critical situation. Only the RS warning is 
an exception, as it rather diminished the drivers’ brake force, 
even significantly compared to the other warning types. 
Especially if the RS warning was gazed at, the benefit of 
receiving a warning was almost evened out in all parameters 
(number of collisions, brake reaction time and maximum 
braking value). Thus, the RS warning visualization cannot be 
recommended for such driver warnings in very critical 
situations. However, it shows that the gaze behavior should be 
further investigated when designing visual driver warnings, for 
its analysis also allowed to mark the other three warning 
visualizations (RG, AG and AS) as rather supportive than 
distractive as their HUD glances did not last extensively long 
(especially in contrast to the RS warning). Thus, the RG, AG 
and AS warning can be recommended, since they all achieved 
the driver warnings’ aim, while differing little from each other 
in their effect on drivers’ performance. 
However, the effect of the warning type still has to be 
analyzed further in the other seven examined scenarios 
(following in another paper) as so far it is still unclear, what it 
is about the examined driver warnings that makes them 
effective, for example their pure presence, visualization (traffic 
signs), location (HUD), modality (visual), a combination of 
those or something else. Further reaction time improvements 
could be expected by combining the driver warnings (in the 
HUD) with an additional acoustical or haptic signal, in case 
drivers are distracted, for example by a not driving related task. 
Moreover, this study concentrated on rather young drivers, but 
the effects might change if older drivers are tested. Thus, the 
driver warnings should also be examined with a group of older 
drivers since with age the information processing (e.g., [16] 
[17]) and drivers’ performance change and possibly decrease 
(e.g., [18] [19]) so that older drivers might react differently 
upon the warning types than younger drivers. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Coelingh, A. Eidehall, and M. Bengtsson, “Collision warning with 
full auto brake and pedestrian detection-a practical example of automatic 
emergency braking,” in 2010 IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems, 
pp. 155-160, 2010. 
[2] R. J. Hanowski, T. A. Dingus, J. P. Gallagher, C. A. Kieliszewski, and 
V. L. Neale, “Driver response to in-vehicle warnings,” Transportation 
Human Factors, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 91-106, 1999. 
[3] J. D. Lee, B. F. Gore, and J. L. Campbell, “Display alternatives for in-
vehicle warning and sign information: message style, location and 
modality,” Transportation Human Factors, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 347-375, 
1999. 
[4] J. Luoma and P. Rämä, “Acceptance of traffic sign information provided 
by an in-vehicle terminal,” in 2002 ITS World Congress on Intelligent 
Transport Systems, 2002. 
[5] M. Ablaßmeier, T. Poitschke, F. Wallhoff, K. Bengler, and G. Rigoll, 
“Eye Gaze Studies Comparing Head-up and Head-down Displays in 
Vehicles,” in 2007 IEEE Multimedia and Expo, 2007, pp. 2250-2252. 
[6] H. Watanabe, H. Yoo, O. Tsimhoni, and P. Green, “The Effect of HUD 
Warning Location on Driver Responses,” 1999 ITS World Congress on 
Intelligent Transport Systems, 1999. 
[7] NHTSA. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, “Preliminary 
Human Factors Guidelines for Crash Avoidance Warning Devices,” 
Project No. DTNH22-91-C-07004, Jan. 1996. 
[8] J. S. Wolffsohn, N. A. McBrein, G. K. Edgar, and T. Stout, “The 
influence of cognition and age on accommodation, detection rate and 
response times when using a car head-up display,” Ophthalmic and 
Physiological Optics, vol. 18, no. 3, 243-253, May 1998. 
[9] P. R. J. A. Alves, J. Gonçalves, R. J. F. Rossetti, E. C. Oliveira, and C. 
Olaverri-Monreal, “Forward Collision Warning Systems Using Heads-
Up Display: Testing Usability of Two New Metaphors,” in 2013 IEEE 
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 2013, pp. 1-6. 
[10] P. George, I. Thouvenin, V. Frémont, and V. Cherfaoui, “DAARIA: 
Driver assistance by augmented reality for intelligent automobile,” in 
2012 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 2012, pp. 1043–1048. 
[11] A. W. Y. Ng and A. H. S. Chan, “The effects of driver factors and sign 
design features on the comprehensibility of traffic signs,” Journal of 
Safety Research, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 321–328, June 2008. 
[12] M. Plavšic, H. Bubb, M. Duschl, M. Tönnis, and G. Klinker, 
“Ergonomic Design and Evaluation of Augmented Reality Based 
Cautionary Warnings for Driving Assistance in Urban Environments,” 
in 2009 IEA World Congress on Ergenomics, 2009. 
[13] Statistisches Bundesamt, “Traffic. Traffic accidents 2013 [Verkehr. 
Verkehrsunfälle 2013],“ 2014. 
[14] H.-P. Krüger, M. Grein, A. Kaussner, & C. Mark, “SILAB-A task-
oriented driving simulation,” in 2005 DSC Driving Simulator 
Conference, 2005, pp. 232–331. 
[15] J. Hoffman, J. D. Lee, T. L. Brown, and D. V. McGehee, “Comparison 
of Driver Braking Responses in a High Fidelity Driving Simulator and 
on a Test Track,” Transportation Research Record, vol. 1803, no. 1, pp- 
59-65, Jan. 2002. 
[16] Rackoff, N., 1974. An investigation of age related changes in driver’s 
visual search patterns and driving performance and the relation to tests 
of basic functional capacities. Ph.D. dissertation, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. 
[17] B. Schlag, “Elderly drivers in Germany fitness and driving behaviour,” 
Accident Analysis and Prevention, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 47-55, Feb. 1993. 
[18] J. K. Caird, S. L. Chisholm, C. J. Edwards, and J. I. Creaser, “The effect 
of yellow light onset time on older and younger drivers’ perception 
response time (PRT) and intersection behavior,” Transportation 
Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 
383-396, Sept. 2007 
[19] X. Yan, E. Radwan, and D. Guo, “Effects of major-road vehicle speed 
and driver age and gender on left turn gap acceptance,” Accident 
Analysis and Prevention, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 843-852, Jul. 2007. 
 
1040
