--- Page 1 ---
Accident prevention through visual warnings 
How to design warnings in head-up display for older and younger drivers 
Juela Kazazi, Susann Winkler & Mark Vollrath 
Technische Universität Braunschweig 
Institut für Psychologie 
Abteilung für Ingenieur- und Verkehrspsychologie 
Braunschweig, Germany 
 
Abstract— Many severe accidents occur in urban areas. As 
part of the research project UR:BAN this study investigated how 
different types of visual warnings can prevent collisions within 
these areas and trigger an adequate driver reaction. For this, two 
different warning types were implemented in a head-up display. 
It was assumed that one of the warning types would trigger an 
immediate and strong brake reaction of the driver (stop sign 
warning). The second warning type should animate the driver to 
be cautious, for example by slightly pressing the brake pedal 
(caution sign warning). As collisions in urban areas are very 
severe for older drivers, differences in the driving performances 
(numbers of collisions, brake reaction time, maximum braking 
value) of older and younger drivers due to the warning types 
were investigated. For this, four urban scenarios were 
implemented in a fixed base driving simulator varying the 
characteristics of the critical object (e.g., pedestrian, lead vehicle, 
obstacle). In total 72 drivers (36 participants aged 20-35 years, 36 
participants aged 65+ years) were tested in a between-subjects 
design (type of warning, age). The study revealed that the 
number of collisions was reduced when drivers were warned 
(especially younger drivers) demonstrating the positive effect of 
warnings in very critical scenarios. In less critical situations, the 
warnings did not reduce the numbers of collisions, since the 
amount of collisions was already low. In critical scenarios older 
drivers preferred the stop sign warning (leading to a faster and 
stronger brake reaction) compared to younger participants. 
Younger drivers had the fastest and strongest brake reaction 
when receiving the caution sign warning. In less critical scenarios 
both warnings had a positive effect on the braking reaction time 
for younger and older drivers.  In both groups the strongest 
brake reaction was reached when receiving the stop sign 
warning. This study demonstrates the importance of warning 
design when wanting to create effective warnings.  
Keywords—Driver Warning, Accident Prevention, Head-up 
Display, Older and Younger Drivers; Simulator Study; Urban Area 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
For most drivers the urban area is a very challenging one 
resulting in a large number of accidents.  Within these areas the 
load of information is very high and the attention has to be 
divided, since many traffic elements (oncoming vehicles, 
traffic lights) need to be perceived simultaneously. Currently 
assistance systems are progressively being implemented in 
vehicles in order to make urban areas safer. Yet, when 
developing assistance systems some imperative factors need to 
be considered [2]. Some of these factors include: location 
(head-up display (HUD), dashboard), modality (visual, 
auditory, haptic), type of information (text, symbols). 
The display location of assistance systems is important to 
support and not distract drivers [8], [1], [11]. Information or 
warning of assistance systems are located in different areas 
within the vehicle, such as, for example, in head-down displays 
(HDD) as well as head-up displays (HUD). Assistance systems 
in HDD force drivers to take their eyes off the road in order to 
get the provided information. Accident occurrence increases 
with the time the eyes are off of the road [14], [12], and [21]. 
Reference [14] conducted a simulator study with truck drivers, 
who were asked to keep their speed close to either 64 km/h or 
112 km/h. Drivers controlled their speed better with 
information displayed on a HUD rather than on a HDD. The 
study of [15] has shown that with a HUD the glance behavior 
of participants was relatively short, since drivers are not forced 
into taking their eyes off of the road. It could also be shown 
that drivers had a gain in reaction time by 0.8 to 1.0 seconds 
with a HUD compared to a HDD. Furthermore, the HUD was 
rated as being “extremely meaningful” (close to 5, on a 1 to 5 
scale). These studies have revealed some of benefits of HUD 
compared to HDD. 
Many studies focus on how to best assist the driver.  Yet, 
research on how to warn the driver and how warnings should 
be designed in the HUD are rare. Some researchers consider 
traffic signs as a type of warning to be intuitive. Drivers are 
confronted with these signs every day and should have an 
association of reaction with them [17] and [16]. Since there are 
many different traffic signs, the question arises whether some 
traffic signs are better suited than others when warning drivers 
and whether different reactions are triggered by different traffic 
signs. It is hypothesized that a stop sign will evoke a fast and 
strong braking, since this sign is linked to an immediate 
reaction. A caution sign, on the other hand, is hypothesized to 
cause the driver to be rather attentive without a harsh braking 
reaction.  
When developing warning systems the age of drivers is not 
to be neglected since many studies have shown that the driving 
behavior as well as the information processing rate of older and 
younger drivers differs. Reference [17] reported that older 
drivers have a reduced information processing rate. They 
performed worse in all laboratory information processing test 
compared to younger drivers. Furthermore it was reported that 
older drivers had a reduction in the speed of performance 
(slower perception and processing of viewed information), as 
2015 IEEE 18th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems
978-1-4673-6596-3/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ITSC.2015.171
1028

--- Page 2 ---
 
 
well as the possibility of overstrain in complex and critical 
situations [18]. Concerning the driving behavior, for example 
[23] examined the effects of traffic speed, driver age and 
gender on left turn gap acceptance behavior, drivers’ 
acceleration rate and steering action at a stop-controlled 
intersection in a driving simulator experiment. A total of 63 
participants (young: 20-30 years; mid aged: 31-55 years; old: 
56-83 years) had to turn left with slow moving traffic (40.2 
km/h) as well as fast moving traffic (88.5 km/h). The results 
showed significant age effects (e.g. older drivers accelerated at 
a slower pace). Yet, older drivers may compensate for their 
cognitive impairments by simplifying their driving task (e.g. 
driving slower as compared to younger drivers) [4], [17], [9], 
[20], [6] and [23]. From this, the question rises, if the symbols 
of warning systems need to be different for older and younger 
drivers. 
As part of the research project UR:BAN the following 
study investigated how warnings should be designed in urban 
areas to warn different drivers of two different age groups 
(older drivers vs. younger drivers). 
The focus of this research was to determine: 
• 
if warnings would help reduce older and younger 
drivers’ crashes in different critical urban scenarios, 
• 
if warning symbols need to be different for older and 
younger drivers, 
• 
what kind of warning symbols might have the best 
effect (e.g., brake reaction time and maximum braking 
value) 
For this, two simulator studies were conducted (older 
drivers vs. younger drivers). These studies will be explained in 
more detail in the next section. 
II. METHOD 
A. Participants 
Two groups of drivers (older and younger drivers) were 
examined. The older participants group contained 36 drivers 
(29 male, 7 female) all being above 65 years old and having a 
mean age of 71.9 years (SD = 4.4 years) as well as an annual 
mileage of about 12,000 km. This study was conducted in the 
time of March 2014 to May 2014. All 36 younger participants 
(20 male, 16 female) were above 18 years old, had a mean age 
of 23.9 years (SD = 4.2 years) and drove about 6000 km 
annually. This study was conducted from July 2013 to October 
2013. Participants were recruited from a database of the 
Technische Universität Braunschweig, consisting of younger 
and older drivers. All drivers were trained in the driving 
simulator in order to ensure that they were familiar and felt 
comfortable driving in the simulator. This training (containing 
three parts, all being the same for older and younger drivers) 
was conducted on the same day as the experiment to increase 
compliance. In the first and second part of the training, the 
participants drove on a straight rural road followed by an urban 
road in order to train acceleration and deceleration. The last 
part contained urban intersections where the participants had to 
turn left/right, in order to get familiar with the turning 
behavior. Participants who developed simulator sickness had to 
be excluded from the study (16 older and 2 younger drivers). 
All 72 remaining participants had normal or corrected-to-
normal vision. They were compensated for their time by either 
receiving a box of chocolates, eight Euros an hour or course 
credit (if university students). 
B. Driver Warnings 
Two different warning signs were considered in this paper. 
Drivers were warned either with a stop sign or a caution sign in 
the HUD. The HUD was located above the roadway, where it 
would not obscure the view of the driver (traffic lights or 
signs). Many warning systems are coupled with an auditory 
signal [10] but a high frequency of auditory signals may 
become annoying for drivers [22]. Furthermore the focus of 
this study lay on the effect of visual warnings, this being the 
reasons that auditory signals are not considered. The duration 
of the warning was individual and depended on the speed of 
the drivers. The onset as well as the offset of the warning was 
triggered at particular flow points. If a participant came to a 
complete stop between the two flow points, the duration of the 
warning was longer as compared to drivers, who did not come 
to a stop between these points. In total, there were four 
experimental groups. One group comprised of older drivers 
only receiving the stop sign warning (SW) in the HUD. The 
other group of older drivers received the caution sign warning 
(CW). Younger participants were also divided into two groups, 
receiving either the SW or the CW warning. Each age group 
had their own control group (C) receiving no warning at all 
(see Table I). The size of the SW warning in the HUD was 
19.9x17.7 cm; the CW warning was 21x19 cm.  
It was assumed that the SW warning would provoke an 
immediate brake reaction of drivers, whereas the CW would 
guide the attention of the driver onto the critical object. It was 
expected that the different symbols (pedestrian, vehicle or 
obstacle) would help drivers to identify the critical object and 
react on it by being cautious and not showing an immediate 
strong reaction.  
WARNING TYPES AND WARNING SYMBOLS 
Type of Warning 
Presentation in head-up display 
Control 
No warning sign 
Stop sign 
warning (SW) 
 
Caution sign 
warning (CW) 
 
 
C. Driving Scenarios and Simulation 
The different scenarios, as seen in Table II, were created 
using the driving simulation software SILAB [13]. Table I 
gives an overview of all scenarios and their criticality, as well 
as the timing of the warnings. The timing of the warnings was 
the same for older and younger drivers in each scenario, except 
the Pedestrian 2 scenario. The results of the previous study 
only with younger participants (which was conducted 
formerly) showed that the timing of the warning was very late. 
Thus, the timing of the warning was changed for the following 
The research is supported by the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs 
and Energy on the basis of a decision by the German Bundestag 
1029

--- Page 3 ---
 
 
study with older drivers (warning was now triggered seven 
meters earlier). 
In each scenario the ego vehicle, driven by the participant, 
traveled through a simulated urban road and had to make a turn 
when it was indicated by a voice output and an arrow in the 
speedometer. Scenarios were implemented to be different in 
their criticality, in order to find out what type of warning was 
best suited for very critical to less critical situations. In the 
Pedestrian 1 scenario, the driver had to make a left turn at an 
intersection. While turning, a pedestrian crossed the ego 
vehicles road. This scenario was implemented to reconstruct a 
critical traffic situation. In the Pedestrian 2 scenario, a 
pedestrian hidden by a parked car suddenly crossed, making 
this scenario a very critical situation. The Vehicle scenario was 
a less critical situation where a lead vehicle came to a sudden 
stop. In the less critical Obstacle scenario, drivers were 
confronted with an obstacle (hay bale) hidden behind a hill.  
TABLE I.  
CRITICALITY OF SCENARIOS AND TIMING OF WARNING USED 
IN THE STUDY 
 
 
The study was conducted in the fixed base medium fidelity 
driving simulator of the Technische Universität Braunschweig. 
The scenery is projected by three beamers on three screens 
(front, left, right) resulting in a 180 degree field of view. 
During this study an automatic transmission was used. Rear-
view mirrors are simulated by three LCD screens (front, left, 
right). By using a driving simulator an accurate measure of 
driving performance is possible and essential variables (road 
type, weather, day time) can be controlled. Furthermore an 
evaluation of warning systems in critical situations is made 
possible without harming the driver.  
D. Procedure 
After reading and signing a consent form, participants were 
instructed in written form about the procedure of the 
experiment. Drivers were told to ‘‘drive as they would 
normally do in their own vehicles” and to obey all traffic rules 
(e.g., speed limits). Afterwards, drivers completed the training 
drive (lasting about 25 min) in order to get familiar with the 
simulator and prevent simulator sickness. During the whole 
experiment the investigator was seated in a separate room, 
having the opportunity to communicate with the participant via 
a microphone. The test drive lasted about 15 min. After that the 
subjects were debriefed about the purpose of the study, 
reimbursed and thanked for their participation. The overall 
duration of the trial was about two hours. The order of 
scenarios in the test drive was not counterbalanced, since the 
effects of the warning types were of interest. 
E. Data and Data Analysis 
Driver behavior was recorded by the simulation software 
SILAB [13]. Table III gives a summary of the dependent 
variables. 
For data analysis IBM SPSS Statistics 22 was used. When 
applicable, a general linear model, with two between-subject 
factors (Type of Warning and Age) was used. For accident 
occurrence, chi-squared tests were conducted. A significance 
level of alpha p = .05 was adopted for all statistical tests. 
TABLE II.  
DEPENDENT VARIABLES REGARDED IN THIS STUDY 
Variable
Unit
Description
Number of collisions 
- 
Number of collisions that occurred 
between the ego vehicle and the 
critical object 
Brake reaction time 
s 
Reaction time to pressing the brake 
pedal after the warning was triggered 
Maximal braking 
value 
% 
Maximal 
value 
of 
brake 
pedal 
pressing 
III. RESULTS 
A. Number of collisions 
Older drivers had a low number of collisions, regardless of the 
presence and type of warning, when compared to younger 
drivers (see Fig. 1).  
There were no significant differences in the number of 
collisions between older and younger drivers in the SW and 
CW group (SW: χ² = 0.38, p = 1.000; CW: χ² = 0.89, p = .640) 
in the Pedestrian 1 scenario. However, younger drivers in the 
control group had significantly more collisions compared to 
older drivers (χ² = 6.75, p = .027).  
In the Pedestrian 2 scenario the amount of collisions for 
younger drivers was relatively high in the experimental groups, 
this being the reason for the changed timing of the warning (see 
section: Driving Scenarios and Simulation). Younger drivers in 
the control group had significantly more collisions compared to 
older drivers in the control group (χ² = 6.75, p = .027). 
Furthermore, younger drivers had significantly more accidents 
in the SW compared to older ones (χ² = 6.32, p = .037).  
In the Vehicle scenario, there were no significant differences 
between younger and older drivers (SW: χ² = 2.18, p = .478; 
CW: χ² = 1.04, p = 1.000). 
In the Obstacle scenario there were no collisions at all. Fig. 1 
gives an overview of the numbers of collisions in Pedestrian 1, 
Pedestrian 2 and Vehicle scenario, where the * stands for p > 
.05. 
Fig. 1: Number of collisions in the Pedestrian 1, Pedestrian 2 and Vehicle 
scenario for older and younger drivers 
 
 
 
 
 
1030

--- Page 4 ---
 
 
B. Brake Reaction Time 
For this analysis a general linear model, with two between-
subject factors (Type of Warning and Age) was used. For this 
analysis not all participants were considered. If participants 
had not pressed the brake pedal and did not have a collision, 
they were excluded from the examination, as the scenario had 
not functioned as planned. If participants had not pressed the 
brake pedal but had a collision, their brake reaction was 
replaced with the longest brake reaction of their individual 
group as this failure to react is similar to a very long reaction 
time. 
 
Fig. 2: Brake Reaction Time in the Pedestrian 1 scenario for older and 
younger drivers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Pedestrian 1 scenario there was an interaction 
between the factors Type of Warning * Age. Older drivers had 
the fastest brake reaction time with SW compared to younger 
drivers who reached their fastest brake reaction time when the 
CW was presented (see Fig. 2). Moreover, for younger drivers 
both warnings were effective in reducing brake reaction time 
while this was not the case for older drivers who had even 
longer brake reaction times with CW than in the control group. 
During the Pedestrian 2 scenario there was a main effect of 
the factor Type of Warning, as seen in Fig. 3. Here the control 
group had significantly the slowest brake reaction time 
compared to the SW (p = .001) as well as compared to the CW 
(p = .003) group.  
Fig. 3: Brake Reaction Time in the Pedestrian 2 scenario for older and 
younger drivers 
 
 
In the Vehicle scenario a main effect of the factor Type of 
Warning as well as Age was found, as seen Fig. 4. The control 
group had the slowest brake reaction time compared to the SW 
(p < .001) and the CW (p = .004) group. Older drivers had an 
overall faster braking reaction compared to younger drivers  
 
Fig. 4: Brake Reaction Time in the Vehicle scenario for older and younger 
drivers 
 
 
 
During the Obstacle scenario there was only a main effect 
of the factor Type of Warning. Here again the control group 
had the slowest brake reaction time compared to the SW (p < 
.001) and the CW (p = .009) group. There was a tendency to a 
significant difference between the SW and CW group, with the 
SW having faster brake reactions (p = .055). The age groups 
did not differ. 
 
 
Fig. 5: Brake Reaction Time in the Obstacle scenario for older and younger 
drivers 
 
Table 5 gives an overview of the test results of the brake 
reaction times in all four scenarios. 
TABLE III.  
RESULTS OF BRAKE REACTION TIME IN ALL FOUR SCENARIOS 
Brake Reaction Time 
Between-subject: Type of Warning (W) 
 
F 
df 
p 
² 
Pedestrian 1 
3.68 
2,60 
.032 
.120 
Pedestrian 2 
7.59 
2,72 
.001 
.187 
Vehicle 
9.71 
2,62 
.000 
.258 
Obstacle 
10.85 
2,70 
.000 
.253 
Between-subject: Age (A) 
 
F 
df 
p 
² 
Pedestrian 1 
0.00 
1.60 
.987 
.000 
Pedestrian 2 
1.76 
1,72 
.189 
.026 
Vehicle 
10.66 
1,62 
.002 
.160 
Obstacle 
0.42 
1,70 
.521 
.006 
W *A 
 
F 
df 
p 
² 
Pedestrian 1 
4.64 
2,60 
.014 
.147 
Pedestrian 2 
0.84 
2,72 
.435 
.025 
Vehicle 
0.09 
2,62 
.914 
.003 
Obstacle 
0.82 
2,70 
.447 
.025 
 
For an overall description of the effect of the warning, we 
computed the mean of the braking reaction time for each 
subject over all scenarios. Fig. 6 gives the results. The brake 
reaction time is reduced from 1.9 s in the control group to 1.2 
s in the SW group and 1.4 s in the CW group. Thus, overall 
there is a slight advantage of the SW type of warning.  
 
Fig. 6: Mean Brake Reaction Times over all scenarios and all drivers in each 
Type of Warning  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1031

--- Page 5 ---
 
 
C. Maximum Braking Value 
For this analysis a general linear model with two between-
subject factors (Type of Warning and Age) was used. The 
maximum braking value gives information about the amount 
(in %) of pressing the pedal. This value demonstrates if the 
driver either pressed the brake pedal slightly or firmly. The 
higher the percentage of the maximum braking value, the 
firmer the brake pedal was pressed. For this analysis not all 
participants were considered. If participants did not press the 
brake pedal and did not have an accident, they were excluded 
from the examination, leading to dissimilar numbers of 
participants in the groups. If participants did not press the brake 
pedal but had a collision, as their maximum braking value the 
smallest maximum braking value of the individual group was 
used.  
In the Pedestrian 1 scenario an interaction between Type of 
Warning * Age was found. Older drivers reached their highest 
maximum braking value in the SW, while younger participants 
had their highest value in the CW, as seen in Fig. 7. For older 
drivers the CW caused a lesser maximal braking values 
compared to the control group. Overall, only the SW warning 
produced larger values than the control group. 
Fig. 7: Maximum Braking Value in the Pedestrian 1 scenario for older and 
younger drivers 
 
 
In the Pedestrian 2 scenario a main effect of Type of 
Warning was found (see Fig. 8). The control group had lesser 
maxima compared to the SW (p = .031) and the CW (p = .046) 
group in both age groups.  
 
Fig. 8: Maximum Braking Value in the Pedestrian 2 scenario for older and 
younger drivers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During the Vehicle scenario a main effect of both the 
factors Type of Warning and Age was found (Fig. 9). 
Participants in the SW (p < .001) and CW (p = .019) group had 
higher maxima’s compared to the control group. Furthermore 
older drivers had overall smaller maxima compared to younger 
drivers (older drivers: M = 35.6 %, SD = 37.6 vs. younger 
drivers: M = 65.2 %, SD = 36.4).  
 
Fig. 9: Maximum Braking Value in the Vehicle scenario for older and younger 
drivers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the Obstacle scenario the factor Type of Warning showed 
a main effect. Compared to the SW group, the control group 
had significantly lower maxima’s (p < .001). No significant 
difference could be found between the control and the CW 
group (Fig. 10). Yet, the SW group had significantly higher 
maxima compared to the CW group (p < .001).  
Fig. 10: Maximum Braking Value in the Obstacle scenario older and younger 
drivers 
 
Table 5 gives an overview of the test results of the 
maximum braking value in all four scenarios. 
TABLE IV.  
RESULTS OF MAXIMUM BRAKING VALUE IN ALL FOUR 
SCENARIOS 
Maximum Braking Value 
 Between-subject: Type of Warning (W) 
 
F 
df 
p 
² 
Pedestrian 1 
2.85 
2,64 
.066 
.089 
Pedestrian 2 
3.02 
2,72 
.056 
.084 
Vehicle 
8.70 
2,64 
.000 
.231 
Obstacle 
17.14 
2,70 
.000 
.349 
Between-subject: Age (A) 
 
F 
df 
p 
² 
Pedestrian 1 
0.20 
1.64 
.888 
.000 
Pedestrian 2 
1.10 
1,72 
.298 
.016 
Vehicle 
11.91 
1,64 
.001 
.170 
Obstacle 
1.95 
2,70 
.167 
.030 
W *A 
 
F 
df 
p 
² 
Pedestrian 1 
3.89 
2,64 
.026 
.118 
Pedestrian 2 
1.86 
2,72 
.164 
.053 
Vehicle 
1.05 
2,64 
.356 
.035 
Obstacle 
1.70 
2,70 
.190 
.051 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Overall, both warnings were somewhat effective as 
compared to the control group in increasing the braking 
reaction of the drivers. However, this effect was stronger for 
the SW warning as compared to the CW warning. This was 
found for both age groups. Additionally, there were some 
differences between the two age groups with regard to the 
amount of braking in some scenarios.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1032

--- Page 6 ---
 
 
Fig. 11: Mean Maximum braking value over all scenarios and all drivers in 
each Type of Warning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV. DISCUSSION 
The study examines the effect of two types of warning in 
different critical scenarios for older and younger drivers. 
Before discussing the results, some caveats have to be 
considered. Comparing the data of different participants is only 
valid to a limited degree due to the different timings of the 
warning. The timing of the warning was not independent of the 
drivers vehicle speed. For further studies the time to collision 
(TTC) should be used as the time to trigger a warning, as 
participants would than receive the warning at the same 
“critical” level. Furthermore, comparing the results of older 
and younger drivers in the Pedestrian 2 scenario is difficult, as 
the time of the triggered warning was different for older and 
younger drivers. Yet, when looking at the control group in this 
scenario, it becomes clear that younger drivers have 
significantly more collisions compared to older drivers 
independently of the timing of the warning. For further studies 
the timing of the warning should be the same for all groups. 
During this study older drivers had less accidents compared 
to younger drivers. One possibility might be that older drivers 
had a higher annual mileage and thus more driving experience 
compared to younger drivers. Other reasons for the low 
accident occurrences of older drivers might have been 
compensatory strategies like driving slower. Additionally, a 
selection bias might have resulted and those older drivers 
volunteering for this study were all in good shape. For further 
studies more female older drivers should be recruited, since the 
amount of female older drivers in this study was relatively low. 
The four implemented scenarios were designed to vary in 
their criticality. This could be shown when looking at the 
maximal braking values in each scenario (Older Drivers: 
Pedestrian 1: 85%; Pedestrian 2: 54%; Vehicle: 36%; 
Obstacle: 45% vs. Younger Drivers: Pedestrian 1: 89%; 
Pedestrian 2: 55%, Vehicle: 65%; Obstacle: 39%). The reasons 
for the different criticalities of older and younger drivers in the 
Vehicle scenario are that older drivers had a significant lower 
speed when the warning was triggered compared to younger 
drivers (F(1, 71) = 22.6, p < .001; older drivers: M = 11.3, SD = 
1.9 vs. younger drivers: M = 12.9, SD = 0.7). Furthermore 
older drivers had a significant larger distance to the lead 
vehicle when pressing the brake pedal (F(1, 61) = 16.51, p < 
.001; Older Drivers: M = 53.3, SD = 30.0 vs. Younger Drivers: 
M = 28.2, SD = 17.8).  Additionally the different criticalities of 
the scenarios become clear when looking at the number of 
collisions. The most accidents occurred in the Pedestrian 2 
(critical) and Pedestrian 1 (very critical) scenario. Furthermore, 
it could be shown that the SW lead to the fastest and strongest 
brake reactions. Yet, the question arises, whether drivers need 
to have a very high braking maximum even if the situation is 
not critical and a sudden and firm brake reaction is not 
required, as in the Vehicle and Obstacle scenario. Here the SW 
could lead to negative effects (e.g., maximum braking value is 
too high and not suited for a less critical situation) so that other 
road users might perceive this behavior as traffic blocking, 
leading to hazardous behaviors of other drivers or resulting in 
rear-end crashes [5]. In order to avoid that, a warning cascade 
should be considered with different warnings depending on the 
criticality of the situation as well as the reaction required. This 
will be discussed in the next section. 
V. CONCLUSION 
The aim of this work was to determine if warning systems 
would help reduce older and younger driver’s crashes in urban 
scenarios. Furthermore the focus laid on the warning symbols 
as well as what kind of warning symbols might have the best 
effect on brake reaction time and maximum braking value in 
critical urban situations. 
The reduced number of accidents, especially for younger 
drivers, demonstrates the positive effects of these warning 
systems in (very) critical scenarios. When the situation is not 
critical, then warning systems did not have a positive effect on 
the reduction of collisions, since the amount of collisions was 
already low.  
In the very critical scenario Pedestrian 2, both warning 
types lead to faster reaction times, as well as maximal braking 
values compared to the control group, independently of the age 
of drivers. 
In the less critical Vehicle scenario both warning types had 
a positive effect on the brake reaction time for older drivers. 
Furthermore older drivers reacted faster compared to younger 
drivers independently of the warning type, at least in this 
scenario. Yet, they had a lower maximum braking value, since 
their velocity was significantly lower compared to younger 
drivers. The highest maximum braking value was reached (in 
both groups) when receiving the SW. 
In the less critical Obstacle scenario, the SW lead to the 
fastest brake reaction as well as to the highest maximum 
braking value in both groups. 
In summary, the warnings used in this study had a positive 
effect on the reduction of accidents for younger drivers. In 
critical situations (e.g., Pedestrian 1) older drivers should 
receive the SW in order to react fast and firm. Younger drivers 
should receive the CW in these critical situations. For very 
critical scenarios (e.g., Pedestrian 2) older and younger drivers 
should receive any kind of warning (no difference between SW 
and CW). In less critical scenarios (Vehicle or Obstacle) the 
CW is best suited for both groups, since a high maximum 
braking value is not required. 
The descriptive results of the warnings, independently of 
the scenario and the age of drivers, showed that the SW lead to 
the fastest reaction time as well as the highest maximum 
 
 
1033

--- Page 7 ---
 
 
braking values. This type of warning can be recommended for 
quite critical scenarios, which demand an immediate driver 
reaction. In less critical situation the CW should be triggered, 
since raising the attention of the driver and a slight braking 
reaction are sufficient reactions. When drivers do not react in 
less critical situations, a warning cascade combining both 
warning types would be reasonable [3], sine the situation might 
become dangerous. If the driver reacts upon the CW as a first 
prewarning stage (e.g. slight braking) the SW will not follow. 
Yet, if the driver did not react upon the CW and the situation is 
about to get critical, the SW warning is to be triggered. This 
warning cascade will be examined in further studies, focusing 
on whether it is suitable for older and younger drivers.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Blanco, W. J. Biever, J.P. Gallagherand T. A. Dingus, “The impact 
of 
secondary 
task 
cognitive 
processing 
demand 
on 
driving 
performance,” Accident Analysis &Prevention, 38 (5), 2006 pp. 895-
906. 
[2] J.K . Caird, S.L. Chisholm and J. Lockhart, “Do in-vehicle advanced 
signs enhance older and younger drivers’ intersection performance? 
[3] Driving simulation and eye movement results,“ Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, 66, 2008, pp. 132-144. 
[4] J.L. Campbell, C.M. Richard, J.L. Brown and M. Mc Callum, “Crash 
warning system interfaces: Human factors insights and lessons learned,” 
(Report No. DOT HS 810 697). Battelle Center for Human Performance 
and Safety, Seattle, 2007 
[5] H.W. Case, S. Hulbert and J. Beers, “Driving ability as affected by age,” 
Final Report No. 70-18, Institute of Transportation and Traffic 
Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, 1970 
[6] M. Dotzauer, “Researching safety issues with intersection assistance 
systems for the older driver, ” In Stevens, A., Krems, J. & Brusques, C. 
(eds.). Driver adaptation to information and assistance systems 
Stevenage, UK, 2013, pp. 123-143.  
[7] J. Fofanova, J. Maciej and M. Vollrath, “Ältere Autofahrer beim 
Linksabbiegen: Eine Beobachtungsstudie im Realverkehr, „ Zeitschrift 
für Verkehrssicherheit, 57 (4), 2011, 176-180. 
[8] P. George, I. Thouvenin, V. Frémont and V. Cherfaoui, “DAARIA: 
Driver assistance by augmented reality for intelligent automobile,” in 
2012 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 2012, pp. 1043–1048. 
[9] P. Green, Visual Task Demands of Driver Information Systems (Tech. 
Rep. No. UMTRI-98-16). The University of Michigan Transportation 
Research Institute, Ann Arbor, MI, 1999 
[10] L. Hakamies-Blomqvist, A. Siren and R. Davidse, R, „Older drivers - a 
review,” VTI rapport 497A. Swedish National Road and Transport 
Research Institute, 2004 
[11] R.J. Hanowski, T.A. Dingus, J.P. Gallagher, C.A. Kieliszewski and V.L.  
Neale, “Driver response to in-vehicle warnings,” Transportation Human 
Factors 1 (1), 1999, pp. 91-106. 
[12] T. Horberry, J. Anderson, M.A. Regan, T.J. Triggs and J. Brown, J, 
“Driver distraction: The effects of concurrent in-vehicle tasks, road 
environment complexity and age on driving performance,” Accident 
Analysis & Prevention, 38(1), 2006, pp. 185-191 
[13] A.H. Jamson and N. Merat, “Surrogate in-vehicle information systems 
and driverbehaviour: Effects of visual and cognitive load in simulated 
rural driving,” Transportation Research: Part E, 8 (2), 2005, pp. 79–96  
[14] H-P. Krüger, M. Grein, A. Kaussner and C. Mark, C, „SILAB-A task-
oriented driving simulation,” In: Proceedings of the Driving Simulator 
Conference (DSC) Iowa City: University of Iowa, USA, 2005, pp. 232–
331. 
[15] Y.C. Liu, Y.Cand and M.H. Wen, “Comparison of head-up display 
(HUD) vs. head-down display (HDD): Driving performance of 
commercial vehicle operators in Taiwan,” Int. J. Human-Comput. 
Studies, vol. 61, no. 5, 2004, pp. 679-697. 
[16] J. Pierowicz, E. Jocoy, M. Lloyd, A. Bittner and B. Pirson, “Intersection 
Collision Avoidance Using ITS Countermeasures,“(Task 9: Final Rep). 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Washington, DC, 2000 
[17] M. Plavsic, H. Bubb, M. Duschl, M. Tönnis and G. Klinker, “Ergonomic 
Design and Evaluation of Augmented Reality Based Cautionary 
Warnings for Driving Assistance in Urban  Environments,” The 17th 
World Congress on Ergonomics (International Ergonomics Association, 
IEA), Beijing, China, Aug. 9 - 14, 2009. 
[18] N. Rackoff, N, “An investigation of age related changes in driver’s 
visual search patterns and driving performance and the relation to tests 
of basic functional capacities,” Ph.D. dissertation, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, Ohio, USA, 1974 
[19] B. Schlag, “Elderly drivers in Germany fitness and driving 
behaviour,”Accident Analysis and Prevention, 25, 1993, pp. 47-55. 
[20] G.E. Stelmach and  A. Nahom, „Cognitive-motor abilities of the elderly 
driver,” Human Factors 34, 1992, pp. 53-65. 
[21] M. Vollrath, J. Maciej, J. Howe and S. Briest, S, “Fahren Ältere 
situationsbewusster als Jüngere? Zeitschrift für Arbeitswissenschaften, 1 
(63), 2009, pp. 23–31. 
[22] M. Wittmann, K. Miklos, G. Peter , S. Alexander, F. Martina, P. Ernst 
and K. Hiroyuki, ”Effects of display position of avisual invehicle task 
on simulated driving, “ Applied Ergonomics, 37, 2005, pp. 187 199. 
[23] M.S. Wogalter, V.C. Conzola and T.L. Smith-Jackson, “Research-based 
guidelines for warning design and evaluation,” Applied Ergonomics, 
33(3), 2002, pp. 219–230. 
[24] X. Yan, E. Radwan and D. Guo, “ Effects of major-road vehicle speed 
and driver age and gender on left turn gap acceptance, “ Accident 
Analysis and Prevention, 39, 2007, pp. 843–852. 
 
 
1034
