--- Page 1 ---
1038   Hye Sun Park et al. 
© 2013 
       ETRI Journal, Volume 35, Number 6, December 2013 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4218/etrij.13.2013.0041 
Augmented reality (AR) is currently being applied 
actively to commercial products, and various types of 
intelligent AR systems combining both the Global 
Positioning System and computer-vision technologies are 
being developed and commercialized. This paper suggests 
an in-vehicle head-up display (HUD) system that is 
combined with AR technology. The proposed system 
recognizes driving-safety information and offers it to the 
driver. Unlike existing HUD systems, the system displays 
information registered to the driver’s view and is 
developed for the robust recognition of obstacles under 
bad weather conditions. The system is composed of four 
modules: a ground obstacle detection module, an object 
decision module, an object recognition module, and a 
display module. The recognition ratio of the driving-safety 
information obtained by the proposed AR-HUD system is 
about 73%, and the system has a recognition speed of 
about 15 fps for both vehicles and pedestrians. 
 
Keywords: AR, augmented reality, HUD, head-up 
display, vehicle and pedestrian recognition, stereo camera, 
SVM, support vector machine, HOG, histograms of 
oriented gradients, driving-safety information, in-vehicle 
intelligent information system. 
                                                               
Manuscript received Mar. 31, 2013; revised Oct. 15, 2013; accepted Oct. 26, 2013. 
This work was supported by the Industrial Strategic Technology Development Program of 
MKE [10040927, Development of Driver-View based In-vehicle AR Display System 
Technology].  
Hye Sun Park (phone: +82 860 4803, hspark78@etri.re.kr) and Kyong-Ho Kim 
(kkh@etri.re.kr) are with the IT Convergence Technology Research Laboratory, ETRI, 
Daejeon, Rep. of Korea. 
Min Woo Park (mwpark@vr.knu.ac.kr), Kwang Hee Won (khwon@vr.knu.ac.kr), and Soon 
Ki Jung (skjung@knu.ac.kr) are with the Virtual Reality Laboratory, Kyungpook National 
University, Daegu, Rep. of Korea.  
I. Introduction 
Augmented reality (AR) is a computer graphics technology 
that supplements a real environment with virtual objects or 
information based on computer technology. AR is currently 
being applied in many aspects of the real world [1]-[8]. In the 
Republic of Korea in particular, as of 2011, the number of 
smartphone users has surpassed twenty million people. 
Accordingly, companies focusing on AR technology are 
actively progressing. According to Juniper Research [9], the 
AR market has increasingly expanded, and it is expected that 
the technology will earn more than seventy billion US dollars 
by 2014. This technology is therefore expected to be applied to 
fields beyond the area of smartphones. 
In 1999, GM started the development of a vehicle-installed 
head-up display (HUD). Thereafter, other famous car 
companies, such as BMW and Peugeot, started to develop 
HUD-based vehicles. However, most of the information 
offered was already available on the dashboard, such as the 
driving speed and vehicle direction. AR technology was first 
used in vehicles in 2010 due to the rapid development of the 
smartphone but only provided limited information to a 
designated area on a vehicle’s windshield [10], [11]. 
However, thanks to the intellectualization and radical 
development of vehicle technology, technologies that can 
provide the driver with a large amount of information within 
the vehicle have been developed. The driver can therefore 
receive not only information on their own vehicle but also 
information on the environment in which they are driving and 
information on their physical state and mental state, such as 
driving habits, inattention (drowsiness or gaze distribution), 
and even health status. 
Past research has indicated that the vast majority of motor 
In-Vehicle AR-HUD System  
to Provide Driving-Safety Information 
Hye Sun Park, Min Woo Park, Kwang Hee Won, Kyong-Ho Kim, and Soon Ki Jung 

--- Page 2 ---
ETRI Journal, Volume 35, Number 6, December 2013 
Hye Sun Park et al.   1039 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4218/etrij.13.2013.0041 
vehicle crashes are caused by human error. According to a 
study released by the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA) of the US Department of 
Transportation and the Virginia Tech Transportation Institute 
(VTTI), 80% of crashes in the United States involve some 
form of driver distraction. Thus, an alarm that alerts the driver 
of an obstacle in the road helps to reduce vehicle accidents. 
Such an alarm is especially important to prevent collisions with 
pedestrians or other cars. In this regard, many such 
technologies and products are being developed around the 
world, and driving-safety information is now being offered to 
the driver through various modalities. Thus, driving workloads, 
including visual, auditory, psychomotor, and cognitive, arise 
when the driver recognizes information transferred through 
touch sensors, in-vehicle terminals, and so on [12]-[18]. In 
particular, the driver receives 80% of this information visually 
while looking forward at the road to support safe driving 
practices [19], [20]. If augmented driving-safety information 
matched with the information regarding the real environment is 
provided while the driver’s gaze is toward the driving direction, 
the driver can recognize the information naturally and focus on 
driving safely. 
Thus, this paper introduces an in-vehicle AR-HUD system 
that detects such driving-safety information and offers the 
information to the driver, fitting the driver’s viewpoint, as 
shown in Fig. 1. In particular, the proposed system intelligently 
judges what information is proper to provide based on road 
attributes associated with vehicle traffic and those associated 
with pedestrian traffic, using the number of lanes, road type, 
and vehicle speed. To improve the performance speed in real 
time, the proposed system operates in one of two modes when 
both modes are not needed, such as on a vehicle-only road. 
In-vehicle AR-HUD technologies are being actively 
developed [21]-[24]. In particular, prominent automobile 
companies are selling high-quality vehicles installed with AR-
HUD products. However, the current commercially available 
AR-HUD products all offer information in front of the driver 
but in a state that does not match the real environment. In 
addition, simple vehicle information (speed, RPM, and so on) 
and route information is displayed in a much more visually 
distracting way than in a head-down display. 
If such driving-safety information as pedestrian and vehicle 
information is offered in front of the driver in a state that does 
not match the real environment, it can interrupt the driver’s 
concentration, causing confusion. Therefore, it is best that the 
interface through which driving-safety information is provided 
appears within the driver’s forward-facing view in a state that 
matches the real environment. In this respect, since 2010, GM 
has been conducting research to provide driving-safety 
information for traffic signs and lanes through an interface that  
 
Fig. 1. Concept map of proposed system. 
Real world
See-through display
<Vehicle detection mode>
Clear weather 
Rainy weather
 
 
superimposes the data onto the real environment in a position 
that accommodates the driver’s view [25]. 
As mentioned above, the proposed method detects the most 
important vehicle and pedestrian information and provides it to 
the driver. Many technologies for detecting such information 
while driving have been previously developed [26]-[32]. 
In the proposed system, stereo cameras are used to extract 
more correct distance values and reduce the recognition times. 
An obstacle on the ground plane is extracted from the visual 
data from the stereo cameras, and other vehicles and 
pedestrians are distinguished from the detected obstacle. Then, 
since the proposed system finds obstacles from the input 
images using ground detection and the system thereafter 
extracts the candidate region and finds the driving-safety 
information only in the extracted region, it can reduce the 
detection area required as compared to existing methods based 
on a single camera that detects all areas of the input images. 
The proposed system is therefore developed to be easily 
combined with real vehicles by reducing the recognition time. 
II. In-Vehicle AR-HUD System for Providing Driving-
Safety Information 
1. Necessity for Development of AR-HUD for Driving-
Safety 
To reduce driving accidents, driving-safety needs to be 
modeled. Among the various models, one suggested in 
Australia consists of four factors: safe speed limit, vehicle 
safety, road-facility safety, and driver safety [33]. 
The first factor, a safe speed limit, applies to driving safety in 
that the driver is expected to maintain a safe distance behind 
the car in front by maintaining a proper vehicle speed. The next 
factor, vehicle safety, refers to the utilization of mounted 
devices used to promote accident prevention. The third factor 
refers to the establishment of safety facilities to reduce 
accidents at known accident sites or crossways. Finally, the 
fourth factor refers to ensuring the protection of the driver 

--- Page 3 ---
1040   Hye Sun Park et al. 
ETRI Journal, Volume 35, Number 6, December 2013 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4218/etrij.13.2013.0041 
through driver education. 
To maintain a safe distance behind other vehicles and avoid 
collisions, the proposed system informs and warns the driver of 
detected obstacles using various mounted devices, under 
consideration of the previously mentioned factors. Through this 
system function, the number of traffic accidents can be 
significantly reduced. 
However, most existing devices provide the driver with 
warning sounds using auditory sensors. In recent years, such 
devices have offered information through vibrations using the 
development of a tactile sensor. However, more than 80% of 
the information is received visually by the driver while driving. 
In addition, for driver safety, the driver must keep their gaze 
forward as much as possible. The literature has shown through 
simple response experiments that reaction times are lowest 
(fastest) for auditory modality (approximately 150 ms), 
followed by touch (approximately 155 ms), with visual 
modality being the slowest (approximately 190 ms). However, 
the transmission of information through vibrations has a 
limitation during driving and may actually interfere with the 
driver. Thus, tactile warning devices can be used only under 
special and emergency situations according to the context of 
the information, such as during driver drowsiness. The driver 
may sometimes ignore the provided information from auditory 
devices when concentrating on driving. 
Previously proposed systems are not equipped to accurately 
recognize the location of a detected obstacle. Regarding 
obstacles that pose a high threat, it is crucial that location 
information be available in the driver’s field of view to 
effectively avoid such obstacles. 
2. Overview of Proposed System 
The hardware and software of the proposed system are 
composed as shown in Fig. 2. Two stereo cameras are mounted 
on the rearview mirror and receive the frontal images in real 
time, with a viewing angle of 65 degrees. PC software installed 
in the vehicle detects other vehicles and pedestrians from the 
input images, and the detection results are provided to the 
driver through a see-through display installed in the windshield, 
fitting the driver’s line of vision. The proposed system detects 
all vehicles and pedestrians in front of the vehicle and provides 
the results to the driver. 
However, future intelligent AR-HUD systems will filter the 
detected information and offer only the information useful to 
the driver according to the provision type (modality) and 
information representation (display) method for easier 
understanding. Based on the problems mentioned above, 
current AR-HUD systems should be further developed, 
considering driver safety. For the purpose of convenience in  
 
Fig. 2. Overview of proposed system. 
Main S/W controller 
Main PC/power supply
Stereo camera 
Stereo camera
See-through
display 
PC monitor 
GPS 
 
 
this experiment, the proposed system is designed to use a see-
through display installed in front of the passenger seat, fitting 
the line of vision of the person in the passenger seat. If the 
proposed system is developed to completion for the 
commercial market, the display will instead be installed on the 
driver’s side. 
3. System Configuration 
Figure 3 shows the configuration of the proposed system. 
The system consists of four modules. Each module is described 
below along with each submodule. 
A. Ground Obstacle Detection Module 
All objects on a road can be potential obstacles. In this 
system, we first extract all obstacles using their geometric 
properties. We also classify them into “significant” and “less 
significant” objects based on the mode selection module, 
which is triggered under certain circumstances. Significant 
objects are identified using specialized detectors (that is, 
vehicle and pedestrian detectors). 
We use a billboard sweep stereo algorithm to identify 
obstacles on the ground plane [34]. Unlike many other 
algorithms that estimate the ground plane after disparity 
matching, the algorithm determines the ground, obstacles, and 
background regions, as well as their corresponding slopes and 
distances, with reliable accuracy. Among the three categories 
stated above, we use obstacle regions and their disparity values 
for further processing. To achieve a near real-time performance, 
we implement the algorithm on a graphics processing unit 
(GPU) and use input at half resolution. 
The billboard sweep stereo algorithm consists of two main 
steps: matching the cost computation and optimization. It  

--- Page 4 ---
ETRI Journal, Volume 35, Number 6, December 2013 
Hye Sun Park et al.   1041 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4218/etrij.13.2013.0041 
 
Fig. 3. Configuration of proposed system. 
  
 
 
 
Vehicle speed
Route
Lane types 
Road attribute 
Map-based various information 
Stereo camera 
Ground obstacle detection module
Stereo rectification
Object decision module 
Object recognition module 
Object classification 
 
Training 
DB 
Recognized 
results 
Display module 
Registration
Results 
displaying 
Calibration 
Stereo input 
Pre-computed 
rectification map 
Homography-based
matching cost 
computation 
Muti-path line 
optimization 
GPS 
Object (vehicle or pedestrian) 
determination 
Decided object’s  
feature extraction 
See-through 
display 
 
utilizes homography-based matching costs using pre-calibrated 
candidate planes, which represent varying slopes of the ground 
plane and distances of the billboard planes. For the next step, 
the algorithm performs multipath line optimization over the 
cost volume to select the disparity values and slopes as well as 
the labels. Billboard labels are considered detected obstacles, 
and the corresponding disparity values are used as the distance 
to the detected objects. 
Therefore, the proposed billboard approach is a road-based 
vehicle detection system. It firstly detects the road geometry 
and computes the depth of obstacles, including the height from 
the road plane. In this case, we assume that all obstacles are 
dangerous. Therefore, we reduce the false positive for vehicle 
detection.  
B. Object Decision Module 
This module selects the detection object using the 
surrounding environment, such as the vehicle speed or road 
type in real time. If the system does not need to find other 
vehicles and pedestrians at the same time, only the selected 
mode is used. This therefore reduces the computation cost. 
This module, based on driving-situation cognition, selects and 
provides the appropriate information. Thus, this module is a 
dynamic and intelligent module for providing driving-safety 
information. 
C. Object (Vehicle/Pedestrian) Recognition Module 
If a detected object between the vehicle and a pedestrian is 
determined through context awareness in the previous module, 
the proposed system should detect the object. For this module, 
the input images and ground obstacle images are needed for 
detection. A ground obstacle is computed using the billboard 
sweep stereo matching algorithm by the ground obstacle 
detection module [35]. Obstacles are deemed dangerous 
according to height. Therefore, we can recognize the partial 
obstacles using the billboard sweep stereo matching algorithm 
even if the detection fails. The vehicle and pedestrian 
recognition module consists of three steps: 1) candidate region 
detection, 2) GPU-based histograms of oriented gradients 
(HOG) extraction, and 3) support vector machine (SVM) 
training and classification. 
First, we generate the hypothesis using the edge-based 
segmentation algorithm. In the edge-based segmentation 
algorithm, we first perform canny edge detection and find the 
horizontal and vertical lines through a variance of intensity 
from the edge image using a generalized projection function 
[36]. After we make the cell region using the detected lines, we 
extract the candidate regions based on the average disparity for 
each segmented cell. In this step, the extracted region is a 
candidate location for a vehicle or pedestrian. 
Next, we extract the HOG features for the detected candidate 
region. An HOG feature is used as the main feature to detect 
other vehicles and pedestrians. In this step, we use GPU 
acceleration to extract the feature descriptor in real time. In 
general, HOG feature extraction consumes a lot of execution 
time in its computation. Therefore, we use a GPU to improve 
the speed of HOG feature extraction for vehicle and pedestrian  

--- Page 5 ---
1042   Hye Sun Park et al. 
ETRI Journal, Volume 35, Number 6, December 2013 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4218/etrij.13.2013.0041 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Object recognition module. 
 
GPU-based HOG extraction
Input data 
 
 
 
SVM classification
Training data
Vehicle  
classifier 
Pedestrian 
classifier 
 
Vehicle detection 
 
Pedestrian detection 
Input image 
Ground obstacles 
Ground obstacles 
Input image 
Detected vehicle 
Ground  
obstacle detection 
Other obstacles 
Detected pedestrian 
Other obstacles 
Segmented cells
Candidates
Candidate region detection
 
detection. 
Finally, we perform a hypothesis verification using two types 
of linear SVM classifiers [37], [38]. The two types of linear 
SVM classifiers are chosen based on the selected mode of the 
previous module. The proposed system performs recognition 
for the detected candidate region using the selected classifier. If 
the recognition is complete, we determine and display the 
vehicle or pedestrian region. Each linear SVM classifier is 
learned using training data composed of positive and negative 
data before the system is performed.  
Figure 4 shows the process of the vehicle and pedestrian 
recognition module. In Fig. 4, we illustrate the detected regions 
and non-detected obstacle regions. 
The proposed method uses the two steps of hypothesis 
generation and hypothesis verification. The method cannot 
increase the processing time. First, we perform the depth 
grouping using a connected component labeling algorithm to 
reduce the computational region in the hypothesis generation 
step. Next, we perform the fast classification using a simple 
linear SVM method in hypothesis verification. Furthermore, 
we perform the tracking and cannot perform the hypothesis 
verification for detected regions by tracking in the next frame. 
Therefore, the proposed method is not affected even if the 
number of candidates is increased. 
D. Display Module 
The system receives the location values (x, y coordinates) of 
pedestrians or vehicles and their distance values, which were 
detected from the previous modules through a TCP/IP socket. 
It also shows the vehicle and pedestrian information detected 
from the input values in the form of a square box, fitting the 
view of the driver. 
To make the information correctly match the real 
environment according to the variations in the driver’s view, 
this system needs to use a rigorous approach [39] to present the 
pedestrian or vehicle information in a 3D space onto an HUD 
display through 3D rendering. For this, the position and eye 
location of the driver should be calculated exactly.  
However, while this method is accurate, the calculations are 
complex. Therefore, the system adopts an approximation 
method [39] with minimum complexity and can match and 
present the information in real time. The method only conducts 
geometric modeling between the 2D image of a camera and a 
2D HUD machine on the assumption that the position and 
view of the driver are fixed toward the front. Since this system 
converts a 2D image into an HUD plane, it is therefore carried 
out in a projective transformation (2D homography) calculated 
by (1): 

--- Page 6 ---
ETRI Journal, Volume 35, Number 6, December 2013 
Hye Sun Park et al.   1043 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4218/etrij.13.2013.0041 
11
c
12
c
13
h
31
c
32
c
33
21
c
22
c
23
h
31
c
32
c
33
,
,
h x
h y
h
x
h x
h y
h
h x
h y
h
y
h x
h y
h










           (1) 
where, xc, yc are the image coordinates in the camera and xh, yh 
are the image coordinates in the HUD. Additionally, h11 
through h33 are projective transformation parameters, each of 
which has eight degrees of freedom. To calculate the projective 
transformation parameter, it is necessary to specify more than 
four point correspondences. In general, an automatic matching 
method, such as SIFT or SURF, is used to correspond feature 
point pairs. However, we manually extract the corresponding 
points between the camera image and the HUD image in the 
proposed system. To determine the projective transformation 
parameter given a set of 2D to 2D point correspondences 
between camera and HUD, we use the direct linear 
transformation (DLT) algorithm; then, we assume the 
parameters follow to affine transformation. Thus, the DLT 
algorithm is easily adapted to enforce the condition by setting 
h31=h32=0 and h33=1. To estimate the remaining h values, (1) is 
translated into (2), and (3) is then extracted using a least 
squares method. 
21
11
12
13
h
c
c
h
h
c
c
c
c
h
c
h
22
23
31
3
c
h
2
0
0
0
1
,
1
0
0
0
h
h
h
h
x x
y x
x
x
y
x
y
y x
y y
y
h
h
h
h










































r
(2) 
where 


11
12
13
21
22,
23
31
32
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
,
H
h
h
h
h
h
h
h
h

a coefficient 
matrix of H is defined by A, and r is a residual vector. 


1
h
h
.
T
T
x
H
A
A
A
y













           (3) 
III. Experiments 
1. Experimental Environments 
For vehicle recognition, we perform an experiment in which 
a vehicle equipped with the proposed system drives at a speed 
of 70 km/h to 80 km/h in more than two lanes, and detects 
other vehicles within 40 m to 45 m of its radius. For the 
pedestrian recognition, we perform an experiment in which a 
vehicle equipped with the proposed system drives at a speed of  
 
Fig. 5. Example of display used in proposed detection results of 
(a) other vehicles and (b) pedestrians. 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
less than 30 km/h along a narrow road in a residential district 
and detects pedestrians within a range of around 30 m of its 
radius. The cameras used for this experiment are GS2-FW-
14S5 models from the Point Grey Research Company, which 
are 8 mm cameras with a resolution of 1038 × 1036 and can 
obtain an image at a speed of 30 fps. In addition, we use IEEE 
1394b for the interface. 
We use a 22-inch transparent Samsung LCD display with a 
transparency of 15%. Figure 5 shows the images of the 
vehicles and pedestrians detected through the proposed system 
on the display. 
2. Experiment Results 
The recognition ratio [40] and recognition speed [41] of this 
system are calculated using (4) and (5). 




true positive
Recognition rate %
,
true positive+false positive

(4) 


tickfrequency
fps
.
end tickcount-start tickcount

      (5) 
The results of the vehicle recognition are shown in Table 1. The 
experiment is conducted in various experimental environments, 
as shown in Fig. 6.  
During vehicle recognition, we comparatively analyze the 
system using two road types: urban road and highway. An  

--- Page 7 ---
1044   Hye Sun Park et al. 
ETRI Journal, Volume 35, Number 6, December 2013 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4218/etrij.13.2013.0041 
Table 1. Vehicle recognition results. 
Vehicle 
Urban road 
Highway 
Highway in rain 
Recognition rate (%) 
72.86 
82.17 
61.50 
Performance (fps) 
13.97 
15.21 
15.60 
 
 
 
Fig. 6. Vehicle recognition results for (a) urban road, (b) highway,
and (c) highway in rain. Pedestrian recognition results for
(d) downtown street, (e) residential street, and (f) urban
road. 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
 
 
urban road is a general road with cars and people walking on a 
sidewalk or crossing through a crosswalk. A highway is usually 
a vehicle-only road. In the case of the highway, we conduct a 
comparative analysis according to the weather conditions. The 
proposed method performs the vision-based forward obstacle 
detection. It performs the alert and notifies the warning for 
collision information. The vision-based method cannot 
generally detect the obstacles in severe weather. However, we 
perform the experiments to measure the robustness of the 
proposed method in rainy weather. Table 1 shows the results of 
the vehicle recognition experiments in sunny and rainy weather. 
The system is more robust on the highway than on the urban 
road. The reason for this is that the surrounding environment is 
more complex on an urban road. In addition, because the 
wipers are automatically turned on when raindrops hit the 
windshield, the recognition rate is lower than on sunny days. 
In pedestrian recognition, we comparatively analyze the 
system using three road types: downtown street, residential 
street, and urban road. A downtown street is a city street with 
cars and people. On such roads, people walk together in groups, 
and the recognition rate is therefore slightly lower. A residential 
street indicates a pedestrian-oriented road or a road with a 
school or similar type of building. On residential streets, 
pedestrians usually do not walk together, and the highest 
recognition rates are therefore achieved in comparison with 
other roads. Finally, an urban road is the same type of road as 
the above-mentioned urban road used for vehicle recognition. 
Table 2. Pedestrian recognition results. 
Pedestrian 
Downtown street Residential street 
Urban road 
Recognition rate (%)
73.48 
81.80 
68.21 
Performance (fps)
14.03 
16.71 
14.60 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. Training dataset for recognition in proposed system: (a)
positive and (b) negative data for training vehicle data. 
(a) 
(b) 
 
In such roads, the driver’s view of the pedestrian may be 
obscured by the vehicle in front of the driver because 
pedestrians mainly exist along the side of the road. Therefore, 
the recognition rate for such roads is the lowest. Table 2 shows 
the results of the pedestrian recognition experiments. The 
system is more robust on a residential street than on the other 
types of road because the background environment is simpler 
and it is less likely that people walk in groups.  
Figure 7 shows the images used in the learning data for the 
vehicle recognition module. A total of 217 images are used as 
positive data, and 410 images are used as negative data. The 
learning data used in the pedestrian recognition module is from 
the INRIA person dataset, with 2,416 images used as positive 
data and 12,180 images used as negative data. 
IV. Conclusion 
The proposed system, in which an HUD system is combined 
in a vehicle with AR technology, matches augmented driving-
safety information with the information on other vehicles and 
pedestrians in the real world and offers the information to the 
driver in real time through a transparent display installed in 
front of the driver, fitting the driver’s view.  

--- Page 8 ---
ETRI Journal, Volume 35, Number 6, December 2013 
Hye Sun Park et al.   1045 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4218/etrij.13.2013.0041 
The proposed method seeks out the ground from the images 
input from stereo cameras and detects the foreground region by 
removing the ground from the image. Within the detected 
foreground region, the system then detects pedestrians and 
vehicles based on their feature points, learns and classifies the 
detected objects through an SVM, and recognizes the vehicles 
and pedestrians from the input images in real time. In this paper, 
we proposed an obstacle detection method based on the road 
geometry. The method reduces the false positive better than 
other detection methods do because we can detect partial 
obstacles using the billboard sweep stereo algorithm. 
Furthermore, we use a GPU acceleration to improve the 
performance of the proposed system. When we tested the 
system on actual roads, we achieved a 72% recognition rate 
regarding other vehicles and a 74% recognition rate regarding 
pedestrians. To increase the recognition rate of the proposed 
system, we need to collect more data by changing the 
illumination, vehicle speeds, and other environmental 
conditions. 
The proposed system can perform real-time obstacle 
detection in sunny or rainy weather. However, it has not been 
verified that the proposed system can likewise perform in 
severe weather or in the nighttime. Therefore, we will extend 
the obstacle detection to work in invisible environments 
through a fusion of night vision technology and radar sensors.  
In addition, this proposed system detects all pedestrians and 
vehicles from the input images within a certain camera range. 
Sometimes, driver distraction is caused by oversaturation of 
information. Therefore, a future system is needed to filter the 
input information and obtain only the information that can help 
protect the driver from accidents. For example, a pedestrian 
who crosses the road or makes a sudden movement toward the 
vehicle would rate high on a scale of danger, whereas a 
pedestrian simply walking in the same direction as the moving 
vehicle would rate low on a scale of danger. Thus, a system 
developed in the future must be able to anticipate such dangers 
based on a model that can predict the movements of 
pedestrians and offer such driving-safety information to the 
driver adaptively, according to the level of risk. 
References 
[1] S.H. Lee, J. Choi, and J. Park, “Interactive e-Learning System 
Using Pattern Recognition and Augmented Reality,” IEEE Trans. 
Consum. Electron., vol. 55, no. 2, May 2009, pp. 883-890. 
[2] B. Choi et al., “A Metadata Design for Augmented Broadcasting 
and Testbed System Implementation,” ETRI J., vol. 35, no. 2, Apr. 
2013, pp. 292-300. 
[3] N. Parimal et al., “Application of Sensors in Augmented Reality 
Based Interactive Learning Environments,” IEEE Int. Conf. ICST, 
Dec. 2012, pp. 173-178. 
[4] 
M.A. 
Oikawa 
et 
al., 
“AR-Based 
Video-Mediated 
Communication: A Social Presence Enhancing Experience,” 14th 
Int. Symp. VR, May. 2012, pp. 125-130. 
[5] Y.M. Aung and A. Al-Jumaily, “AR Based Upper Limb 
Rehabilitation System,” IEEE Int. Conf. BioRob., June 2012, pp. 
213-218. 
[6] T. Zysk, J. Luce, and J. Cunningham, “Augmented Reality for 
Precision Navigation,” GPS World Mag., vol. 23, issue 6, June 
2012, pp. 47-51. 
[7] H. Chen et al., “Application of Augmented Reality in Engineering 
Graphics Education,” IEEE Int. Symp. ITME 2, art. no. 6132125, 
Dec. 2011, pp. 362-365. 
[8] Y.C. Cheng et al., “AR-Based Positioning for Mobile Devices,” 
Int. Conf. Parallel Process., no. 6047276, Sept. 2011, pp. 63-70. 
[9] J.J. Mccorvey, “Using Augmented Reality to Market Your 
Business,” Inc., Apr. 2010. http://www.inc.com/magazine/ 
20100401/using-augmented-reality-to-market-your-business.html 
[10] Siemens, “From Sedans to Compact Cars — One HUD Fits All,” 
press photo, reference no. 200605004, Siemens AG, Munich, 
Germany, 2006. http://www.siemens.com/press/en/presspicture/? 
press=/en/pp_sv/2006/sv200605004_(hud)_1376467.htm 
[11] J. Lincoln, D. Lincoln, and M. Carmean, How a Laser HUD Can 
Make Driving Safer, MicroVision Program Brief, MicroVision, 
Inc., Mar. 2007. 
[12] R. Parasuraman, R. Molloy, and I.L. Singh, “Performance 
Consequences of Automation-Induced Complacency,” Int. J. 
Aviation Psychology, vol. 3, no. 1, 1993, pp. 1-23. 
[13] NHTSA, Measuring Distraction Potential of Operating In-Vehicle 
Devices, no. DOT-HS-811-231, Dec. 2008. 
[14] S.C. Lee, “Psychological Effects on Aged Driver’s Traffic 
Accidents,” Korea J. Psychological Soc. Issues, vol. 12, 2006, pp. 
149-167. 
[15] Y. Zhang, Y. Owechko, and J. Zhang, “Learning-Based Driver 
Workload Estimation,” Comput. Intell. Automobile Appl., Ser. 
Studies Comput. Intell., vol. 132, 2008, pp. 1-24. 
[16] E.R. Michael, J.G. Leo, and J.W. Nicholas, “Effects of Naturalistic 
Cell Phone Conversations on Driving Performance,” Int. J. Safety 
Research, vol. 35, 2004, pp. 453-464. 
[17] E. Adella, A. Varhely, and M. Fontana, “The Effects of a Driver 
Assistance System for Safe Speed and Safe Distance: A Real-Life 
Field Study,” Int. J. Transp. Research Part C 19, 2011, pp. 145-
155. 
[18] E. Johan, J. Emma, and O. Joakim, “Effects of Visual and 
Cognitive Load in Real and Simulated Motorway Driving,” Int. J. 
Transp. Research Part F, vol. 8, 2005, pp. 97-120. 
[19] R. Venkatasawmy, The Digitization of Cinematic Visual Effects: 
Hollywood’s Coming of Age, UK: Press Lexington Books, 2013. 
[20] A.S. Cohen and R. Hirsig, Feed Forward Programming of Car 
Driver’s Eye Movement Behavior: A System Theoretical 

--- Page 9 ---
1046   Hye Sun Park et al. 
ETRI Journal, Volume 35, Number 6, December 2013 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4218/etrij.13.2013.0041 
Approach, final technical report, vol. 2, 1980, pp. 1-223. 
[21] V. Charissis and S. Papanastasiou, “Human-Machine 
Collaboration through Vehicle Head Up Display Interface,” Int. J. 
Cognition, Technol., Work, vol. 12, no. 1, 2010, pp. 41-50. 
[22] Y.C. Shinko, D. Anup, and M.T. Mohan, “Active Heads-up 
Display Based Speed Compliance Aid for Driver Assistance: A 
Novel Interface and Comparative Experimental Studies,” IEEE 
Int. Symp. IV, 2007, pp. 594-599. 
[23] A. Sato et al., “Visual Navigation System on Windshield Head-Up 
Display,” Proc. 13th World Congress ITS, 2006, pp. 167-175. 
[24] H. Watanabe et al., “The Effect of HUD Warning Location on 
Driver Responses,” Proc. 6th World Congress ITS, 1999, pp. 1-10. 
[25] C. Jablonski, “An Augmented Reality Windshield from GM,” 
Mar. 
2010. 
http://www.zdnet.com/blog/emergingtech/an-
augmented-reality-windshield-from-gm/2164 
[26] V. Poortere et al., “Efficient Pedestrian Detection: A Test Case for 
SVM Based Categorization,” Proc. ICVW, Sept. 2002, pp. 19-20. 
[27] D.M. Gavrila and V. Philomin, “Real-Time Object Detection for 
Smart Vehicles,” IEEE Int. Conf. CVPR, 1999, pp. 87-93. 
[28] S. Hermann and R. Klette, “Iterative Semi-Global Matching for 
Robust Driver Assistance Systems,” Int. Conf. ACCV, vol. 7726, 
2012, pp. 456-478. 
[29] H. Hattori et al., “Stereo-Based Pedestrian Detection Using 
Multiple Patterns,” Int. Conf. BMVC, 2009, pp. 1-10. 
[30] M. Bajracharya et al., “A Fast Stereo-Based System for Detecting 
and Tracking Pedestrians from a Moving Vehicle,” Int. J. 
Robotics Research, vol. 28, 2009, pp. 1466-1485. 
[31] A. Shashua, Y. Gdalyahu, and G. Hayun, “Pedestrian Detection for 
Driving Assistance Systems: Single-Frame Classification and 
System Level Performance,” IEEE Int. Symp. IV, 2004, pp. 1-6. 
[32] S. Munder and D.M. Gavrila, “An Experimental Study on 
Pedestrian Classification,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. 
Intell., vol. 28, no. 11, 2006, pp. 1863-1868. 
[33] Australian Transport Council, The National Road Safety Strategy 
2011-2020, 2011, pp. 1-108. 
[34] K.H. Won and S.K. Jung, “Billboard Sweep Stereo for Obstacle 
Detection in Road Scenes,” Int. J. IET, vol. 48, issue 24, Nov. 
2012, pp. 1528 -1530. 
[35] M.W. Park, K.H. Won, and S.K. Jung, “Vehicle Detection and 
Tracking Using Billboard Sweep Stereo Matching Algorithm,” 
Korea J. KMMS, vol. 16, no. 6, 2013, pp. 764-781.  
[36] Z.H. Zhou and X. Geng, “Projection Functions for Eye 
Detection,” Int. J. Pattern Recognition, vol. 37, no. 5, 2004, pp. 
1049-1056. 
[37] C. Cortes and V. Vapnik, “Support-Vector Networks,” Int. J. Mach. 
Learning, vol. 20, no. 3, 1995, pp. 273-297. 
[38] T. Joachims, “Making Large-Scale SVM Learning Practical,” 
Advances in Kernel Methods — Support Vector Learning, B. 
Schölkopf, C. Burges, and A. Smola, Eds., Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1999. 
[39] K.A. Paul and H. Ayman, “A Comparative Analysis between 
Rigorous and Approximate Approaches for LiDAR System 
Calibration,” Korea J. KSGPC, vol. 30, no. 6, 2012, pp. 593-605. 
[40] Wikipedia, Precision and recall. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Precision_and_recall 
[41] Gamedev.net, Calculate framerate with GetTickCount function. 
http://www.gamedev.net/topic/621703-calculate-framerate-with-
gettickcount/ 
 
 
Hye Sun Park has been a senior engineer of  
the Human-Vehicle Interaction Research Center 
at ETRI, Daejeon, Rep. of Korea, since 
December 2009. She received her Ph.D. from 
the School of Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science at Kyungpook National 
University in 2007, where she was a member of 
the Artificial Intelligence Lab. She was selected as a delegate from 
Korea for the 2nd China-Japan-Korea Young Researchers Workshop 
(five members in IT). She also received the JSPS (Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science) during her studies as a postdoctoral fellow at 
Kyoto University, Japan. In addition, she was a cooperative overseas 
researcher at Kyoto University during her master’s and doctoral studies 
with support from BK21 (Brain Korea 21) and NRF (National 
Research Foundation of Korea). Her research areas include computer 
vision and HCI (human-computer interaction). 
 
Min Woo Park is currently a Ph.D candidate in 
the Virtual Reality Lab. at Kyungpook National 
University. His research topic is image 
registration and safety systems for intelligent 
vehicles. He received his B.S degree in computer 
engineering from Dongguk University in 2005 
and his M.S degree in computer engineering 
from Kyungpook National University in 2007. 
 
Kwang Hee Won received his B.S., M.S., and 
Ph.D. degrees in computer engineering from 
Kyungpook National University, Rep. of Korea. 
He is currently a postdoctoral fellow in the 
School of Computer Science and Engineering at 
Kyungpook National University. His research 
interests include stereo image processing, object 
detection from 2D images, and 3D point clouds. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

--- Page 10 ---
ETRI Journal, Volume 35, Number 6, December 2013 
Hye Sun Park et al.   1047 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4218/etrij.13.2013.0041 
Kyong-Ho Kim is a principal researcher and the 
director of the Human-Vehicle Interaction 
Research Center at ETRI, Daejeon, Rep. of 
Korea. He received his B.S. and M.S. degrees in 
electronics 
engineering 
from 
Kyungpook 
National University, Rep. of Korea, in 1993 and 
1995, respectively, and his Ph.D. degree in 
computer science from KAIST, Rep. of Korea, in 2010. Since 1994, he 
has been with ETRI. His current research topics include intelligent 
vehicles, human-computer interaction, head-up display, and augmented 
reality applications in the vehicle. 
 
Soon Ki Jung is a professor in the School of 
Computer 
Science 
and 
Engineering 
at 
Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Rep. of 
Korea. He received his Ph.D. degree from the 
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and 
Technology, Rep. of Korea, in 1997. His research 
areas include computer vision, computer graphics, 
and virtual reality. 
