--- Page 1 ---
International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction
ISSN: 1044-7318 (Print) 1532-7590 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/hihc20
A Review of Augmented Reality Heads Up Display
in Vehicles: Eﬀectiveness, Application, and Safety
Mark Winkler & Morteza Soleimani
To cite this article: Mark Winkler & Morteza Soleimani (06 Jan 2025): A Review of Augmented
Reality Heads Up Display in Vehicles: Eﬀectiveness, Application, and Safety, International
Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, DOI: 10.1080/10447318.2024.2443252
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2024.2443252
© 2025 The Author(s). Published with
license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
Published online: 06 Jan 2025.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 2910
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hihc20

--- Page 2 ---
SURVEY ARTICLE
A Review of Augmented Reality Heads Up Display in Vehicles: Effectiveness, 
Application, and Safety
Mark Winklera 
and Morteza Soleimanib 
aJLR, Coventry, United Kingdom; bWMG, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom 
ABSTRACT 
This paper reviews the evolution of driver displays, focusing on the transition to Augmented 
Reality Heads-Up Display (AR HUD) in vehicles. It compares AR HUD with traditional HUD, empha­
sising safety, cognitive workload, and user experience. Particular attention is given to AR HUD’s 
role in automated vehicles, especially during driver handover from automated to manual driving. 
Findings suggest AR HUD can enhance safety and user experience when applied effectively but 
may increase distraction and cognitive load if misused. Benefits include improved navigation 
through reduced cognitive load, decreased inattentional blindness, and better obstacle detection, 
such as identifying pedestrians. A notable gap in the literature is that AR HUD is often studied as 
an extension of the main driver display rather than as a primary display. This review highlights AR 
HUD's potential as the sole display, emphasising the need for further research. Overall, AR HUD 
presents transformative possibilities for enhancing vehicle user experience.
KEYWORDS 
Augmented reality; Heads 
up display; AR HUD; ADAS; 
automated vehicles; driver 
display   
1. Introduction
Driving plays a substantial part of life for the majority of 
households. In fact, over 78% of households owned at least 
one car in 2021 (National Travel Survey, 2021). With such a 
high percentage of ownership, driving is an everyday task 
for many. During driving, traditionally, the driver would 
have some sort of information cluster, instrument panel or 
dials in front of them. As described by Sun et al. these dials 
typically show the speed using a speedometer and an engine 
tachometer (Sun et al., 2020). These could be complemented 
with another dial for the fuel level and water temperature.
The dials slowly transitioned into part digital, where the 
current speed was displayed with a type of digital output. 
For instance, the 1983 Renault 11 had a fully digital display, 
but even before that the 1976 Aston Martin Lagonda was 
the first (Braithwaite-Smith, 2023). The advancement of dis­
plays throughout the years enabled more and more vehicles 
to have digital displays.
Then, there is the heads up display (HUD). It has evolved 
from the reflector sight which was a technology that origi­
nated from the 1900s (Jarrett, 2017). Afterwards, the technol­
ogy has moved into aircraft cockpits, and later into vehicles, 
with the first one being commercially available was the 1988 
Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme (Johnson, 2019). But what is a 
heads-up display or HUD? It is a type of display and an add­
ition to dials or digital display. It is another way of displaying 
various driving information’s such as speed of the vehicle. It 
uses optics to project information onto the windscreen in 
front of the driver’s field of view and it enables the drivers 
gaze to remain at the outside world. There is also the option 
during the build process to set the distance of the HUD 
image, meaning it can appear that it is a few metres ahead of 
the driver, which can reduce the reaccommodating time 
between the driver looking at the HUD display and the out­
side world compared to having the HUD display closer to the 
driver (Ward & Parkes, 1994). Commercial HUDS do have 
their issues. They do not superimpose information between 
the real and virtual world. Because there can be a mismatch 
between these virtual projections and the real scene, it can cre­
ate issues in terms of cognitive workload (Park & Kim, 2013). 
This is where Augmented Reality Heads-up Display or AR 
HUD comes in.
Augmented Reality Heads Up Display (AR HUD) is an 
evolution of a traditional HUD, where the real environment 
is supplemented with virtual objects or information using 
computer technology (Husar et al., 2022; Park & Kim, 
2013), which is similar to HUD, however most of the infor­
mation displayed, were already part of the dashboard, such 
as the speed. AR HUD is able to provide a larger amount of 
information (Park et al., 2013). Because AR HUD can inter­
act with real objects, it can for example alert drivers of an 
obstacle, highlight road signs or upcoming turns and lane 
information. The purpose of this literature review is to 
explore the current and future use of AR HUD.
CONTACT Morteza Soleimani 
morteza.soleimani@warwick.ac.uk 
WMG, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom 
ß 2025 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC. 
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4. 
0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in 
any way. The terms on which this article has been published allow the posting of the Accepted Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2024.2443252

--- Page 3 ---
With this technology, vehicle manufacturers are able to 
implement solutions where the AR HUD augments traffic 
signs many metres away, highlight upcoming hazards such as 
cars braking and aid in navigation by directly projecting 
arrows to specific turns. A description by Deng et al. states 
that AR HUD is a system that allows the user to see 
“navigation and warning information directly through the 
windshield” (Deng et al., 2021). Various authors, highlight the 
fact that traditional HUD can only produce images at a fixed 
distance, which can cause frequent refocusing as opposed to 
AR HUD which can appear at a variable distance (Deng et al., 
2021; Schneider, 2021; Skirnewskaja & Wilkinson, 2022; Wang 
et al., 2022). AR HUD can have the ability to increase drivers’ 
situational awareness since their gaze is kept on the road 
rather than looking down. AR HUD could even display non 
driving critical content like entertainment, especially when 
looking at more automated vehicles (Riegler et al., 2021).
A literature review focused on the visualisation of AR 
HUD was conducted in 2022; in this the author explored 
the user experience and trust. This was review from a per­
spective of specific features like highlighting routes and 
object highlights (Kettle & Lee, 2022). This literature review 
expands on that and considers motion sickness, more high­
lights and various other angles for trust and on top of that 
covers other aspects like the size of the AR HUD area for 
effectiveness. In fact, the review states that more should be 
researched around inclusive design and visual impairment 
which is what this literature review covered around disabil­
ities. In addition, this literature review explores research 
works into inattentional blindness and presents a different 
literature gap.
The scope of this paper is around specific use cases where 
AR HUD’s performance and benefit can be measured and 
where AR HUD can be compared to traditional HUD. The 
effectiveness and performance section includes navigation for 
a specific use case and goes onto expand some key concepts 
that AR HUD can potentially help with. The other focus is 
with automated vehicles with two big focus trust and hand­
overs. The former can potentially be a big hurdle to get over 
which makes it an important topic from the AR HUD per­
spective and the latter will be an increasingly common action 
as more and more semi- automated vehicles release where 
control must be handed back to the user. This is a new phe­
nomenon for driving and one that is important to explore 
from the AR HUD perspective to make as safe as possible.
To guide the review and frame the discussion, clear 
research questions have been formulated. These questions 
are intended to address the key areas of interest and provide 
a structured approach to understanding the impact and 
potential of AR HUD systems in vehicles. The primary 
research questions are:

How does AR HUD compare to traditional HUD in 
terms of effectiveness, performance, and user experience?

What impact does AR HUD have on cognitive load, inat­
tentional blindness, and obstacle detection?

How can AR HUD be effectively integrated into auto­
mated vehicles, particularly during handover scenarios?

What additional considerations, such as psychological 
impacts, visibility, and usability, should be accounted for 
when implementing AR HUD?
While this is a review paper and not an empirical study, 
these questions help in structuring the review and focusing 
on key areas of interest.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: 
Section 2 details the literature review strategy. Section 3
explores the application of AR HUD in navigation, including 
SAE levels and handover applications where AR HUD can 
assist in guiding user focus. Section 4 examines psychological 
aspects such as inattentional blindness, trust, anxiety, and col­
our blindness. Section 5 discusses design and features, includ­
ing obstacle highlighting, visibility, 3D aspects, size, and 
controls, all critical for AR HUD performance. Section 6
addresses unaddressed challenges and future trends, particu­
larly the potential for AR HUD to serve as the main and only 
display in vehicles, eliminating traditional driver displays.
2. Literature review strategy
To ensure a comprehensive and systematic review of the lit­
erature on AR HUD in vehicles, a rigorous search and selec­
tion strategy has been employed. The following outlines the 
methodology and criteria for including or excluding studies 
from this review.
2.1. Search strategy
The literature search was conducted using several academic 
databases, including Google Scholar, IEEE Xplore, and 
ScienceDirect. The search aimed to cover a broad range of 
relevant studies, ensuring comprehensive coverage of the 
topic. The following keywords and phrases were used to 
search for relevant literature:

“Augmented Reality Heads-Up Display” (AR HUD)

“AR HUD effectiveness and performance”

“AR HUD navigation”

“AR HUD inattentional blindness”

“AR HUD cognitive load”

“AR HUD obstacle detection”

“Autonomous vehicles AR HUD handover"

“SAE levels and AR HUD”

“Trust in AR HUD systems”

“Psychological aspects of AR HUD”

“AR HUD visibility and 3D”

“AR HUD size and controls”

“AR HUD and colour blindness”

“AR HUD vs HUD”
2.2. Inclusion and exclusion criteria
The inclusion criteria for selecting studies were:

Relevance: The study must be directly related to AR 
HUD in vehicles.
2
M. WINKLER AND M. SOLEIMANI

--- Page 4 ---

Publication Date: Preference was given to studies published 
in the last 10 years to ensure contemporary relevance.

Peer-Reviewed: Only peer-reviewed articles, conference 
papers, and a few websites from specific manufacturer 
and company.
The exclusion criteria were:

Irrelevance: Studies not directly related to the specified 
AR HUD topics were excluded.

Non-peer-reviewed Sources: Articles such as opinion 
pieces, non-peer-reviewed papers, and non-scientific 
articles were not considered.

Duplicate Studies: Multiple studies reporting the same 
findings were filtered to avoid redundancy.
2.3. Analysis and synthesis
Each selected study was analysed to extract relevant data 
regarding the effectiveness, performance, cognitive load, navi­
gation, inattentional blindness, obstacle detection, and other 
pertinent aspects of AR HUD. For studies on autonomous 
vehicles, focus was placed on SAE levels, trust, and handover 
scenarios. Additional considerations such as psychological 
impacts, visibility, 3D aspects, size and controls, and disability 
issues (e.g., colour blindness) were also reviewed.
The extracted data was then synthesised to identify pat­
terns, draw comparisons, and highlight key findings and 
gaps in the literature. This comprehensive approach ensured 
that the review encompassed a broad and relevant spectrum 
of the current state of AR HUD research in vehicles.
3. Application
3.1. Navigation
There are several sources that compare the effectiveness of 
HUD compared to AR HUD. Bolton et al. has focused 
research with navigation elements and found that compared 
to traditional HUD distance-to-turn navigation performed 
worse than AR landmark box presentation. The results of 
this research concluded that the response times and success 
rates were improved by 43.1% and 26.2% respectively, in 
favour of the AR HUD solution. In addition to this the driv­
ers stated a “significant reduction of workload” (Bolton 
et al., 2015). All of this shows that there are serious benefits 
in using AR HUD technologies for navigation. It is worth 
noting that in this research landmark boxes were essentially 
AR HUD boxes that superimposed over specific landmarks, 
however as part of the research AR arrows showing turns 
were also used to compare against traditional HUD. The 
research concluded that landmark boxes highlighted specific 
landmarks at required intersections, interestingly worked 
even better than AR HUD arrows (Bolton et al., 2015), as 
shown in Figure 1.
Further study can be found by Wu et al, in their study 
around landmark based car navigation that uses a full-wind­
shield HUD. The study they conducted is similar to the one 
by Bolton et al. as they also highlighted specific landmarks 
for instance street signs to aid in navigation, but it was 
approached from a technical standpoint around distortion 
correction. The study concluded that highlighting these 
landmarks is possible, but the system needs to consider dis­
tortion related to the car windshield, location of sensors and 
the angle. In the research they argued that in traditional 
navigation systems the cognitive load increases, since the 
user has to map the information between the phone/naviga­
tion system and the real world. That is where AR HUD can 
help (Schneider, 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2009). 
This study did not go into psychological effects, however 
later research and studies in this paper do explore more 
around cognitive load and trust.
To expand Bark et al. had published specific research 
around AR HUD and navigation. In general, the research 
results were positive and found that users were able to pin­
point turn locations earlier with AR HUD systems, along 
with keeping eyes up longer. They have expanded that the 
design of the system could be improved by taking advantage 
of environmental landmarks (Bark et al., 2014), which is 
similar to the research what Bolton et al. suggested and Wu 
et al. highlighted around the usage of landmark boxes 
(Bolton et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2009) Other suggestion men­
tioned that the “preview” stage should also be visible to 
ensure the user knows what is coming up after the current 
manoeuvre (Chauvin et al., 2023).
Research, that explored effective HUD and AR HUD 
design suggested that AR graphics might not be better than 
other HUD interfaces. It compared fixed and conformal 
arrows for navigation and found that distraction, driving 
impact, navigation, trust and viewing all scored worse than 
normal HUD. We must bear in mind that the participants 
were asked subjectively rather than measured questions such 
as “Using this interface had a positive impact on my driv­
ing” (Gabbard et al., 2019). However, actual measurements 
showed that participants would glance/look at AR HUD 
more often and for longer than HUD. This in conclusion 
means that HUD resulted in lower workload and better 
usability. Simply projecting AR HUD graphics are “not 
necessarily an inherently better user experience, and spatially 
locating directional graphics into the forward roadway can 
cause more workload in some instances” (Gabbard et al., 
2019); conformal and screen fixed examples are shown in 
Figure 2. The study suggest that much more work should be 
done to compare and test the benefits of AR HUD com­
pared to HUD. Especially further examination of visual 
attention in different road conditions and unexpected events 
should be explored (Gabbard et al., 2019).
3.2. SAE levels
Fully automated vehicles are on the rise (Autonomous 
Vehicles Market to Surpass USD 2324.5 Billion by 2030 on 
Account of Rising Consumer Demand and Increasing R&D 
Investments j Research by SNS Insider, 2023). Whilst cur­
rent commercial automated vehicles are very limited and 
typically SAE level 2 (user supervises and fallback ready) 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
3

--- Page 5 ---
(International, S, SAE J 3016 - Taxonomy and Definitions 
for Terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for On- 
Road Motor Vehicles, 2023). A very limited number of sys­
tems are currently on track to achieve SAE Level 3 (fallback 
ready) (International, S, SAE J 3016 - Taxonomy and 
Definitions for Terms Related to Driving Automation 
Systems for On-Road Motor Vehicles, 2023); Table 1 sum­
marises the information from SAE International J3016 
regarding the different levels of automation.
Mercedes is one the first to bring out an SAE Level 3 
driver assist system, specifically in US and more specifically 
in Nevada for their Mercedes-Benz EQS and S class vehicles 
soon (Tarantola, 2023). There are exceptions, because there 
are specific companies such as Waymo using Jaguar I-Pace 
vehicles operating in specific cities in US at an SAE Level 4. 
This means that a user can order a driverless taxi and once 
it arrives, get into the back seat with no-one at the front 
(Waymo, 2023).
3.3. Handover
In SAE Level 3 which is the one car manufacturers are aim­
ing for, as discussed above (Tarantola, 2023), handover is a 
key part. Described in SAE J3016, Level 2 requires the user 
to supervise, and handover (fallback-ready) can happen at 
any time. Level 3 should be fall-back-ready where handover 
might need to happen (International, S, SAE J 3016 - 
Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to Driving 
Automation Systems for On-Road Motor Vehicles, 2023). In 
a study a comparison was made between traditional driving 
and using AR HUD. The experiment included a longitudinal 
and lateral malfunction took place. Essentially using AR 
HUD resulted in fewer crashes by having a significantly 
lower takeover time where the user had to take control. In 
addition, AR HUD increases trust and usability rating and 
no increase in workload was found (Feierle et al., 2022). 
This cognitive load was highlighted as both negative and 
positive previously in this paper, however when it is positive 
and conforms to human computer interaction it could 
improve cognitive load (Bauerfeind et al., 2021; Bram-Larbi 
et al., 2021; Cheng et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2021; Schneider, 
2021; Teng et al., 2023). The research into handovers and 
AR HUD, concluded that handovers/take-overs, which are 
an inherent parts of SAE Level 2 and Level 3 driving, are 
faster and safer when using AR HUD compared to tradi­
tional methods such as driver display (Feierle et al., 2022; 
Figure 1. Experimental conditions showing HUD images superimposed on road scene (from left to right in order: conventional, AR arrows, landmark arrows and 
landmark boxes (Bolton et al., 2015).
Figure 2. Showing solution with AR HUD arrow (Gabbard et al., 2019).
4
M. WINKLER AND M. SOLEIMANI

--- Page 6 ---
Jing et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2024). This means that AR HUD 
in automation capable vehicles can promote safety, but on 
top of that Figure 3 shows that other metrics measured and 
tested for all performed, on average, better with AR HUD 
(Feierle et al., 2022).
Related to this as a counterpoint, there was a study 
around AR HUD and impact on drivers’ response to unex­
pected events. In this study surprise events took place that 
participants were not aware of. In this situation several posi­
tions of HUD-low, mid, high and HDD (head down display) 
were tested. All scenarios were unexpected and there were 
more crashes than no crashes recorded. The study was fairly 
limited in terms of sample size and somewhat inconsistent 
across these tests, however it seems that AR HUD did not 
reduce the number of crashes in this study, but it did con­
clude that the display location may impact the outcome 
(Smith et al., 2020). It is worth noting that this study was 
manual driving specifically, so the results where automated 
driving is directly tested with AR can vary. Other studies 
highlighted that the way it is implemented needs to be care­
fully considered to ensure improved handovers (Detjen 
et al., 2022). More studies and research need to focus on 
testing, cognitive loads and crash avoidance to see how 
much AR HUD helps with these as well as the position of 
the AR HUD system.
Specifically focusing on automated driving and handovers 
a conference proceedings document concluded an experi­
ment with transition from automated to manual mode with 
HUD and with AR HUD. Drivers’ reactions were typically 
sharper after a handover request (referred to as takeover 
here) when compared to manual driving. This includes 
brake pedal speed and increased vehicle dynamics (the value 
of acceleration in particular). Fundamentally drivers pre­
ferred to have greater distance to vehicles ahead after a take­
over. An interesting fact is that straight after takeover, most 
drivers take less than one second to turn the steering wheel 
by a significant angle, probably to check that they are indeed 
in control.
In this study AR had no influence on the takeover itself, 
however after takeover the results show that driver smooth 
out the control of the car better and especially if traffic is 
slowing. The control of the brake pedal and resulting accel­
eration is smoother. Which can be attributed to the aug­
mented highlight of the vehicle in front with AR HUD. 
Therefore, the study concludes that AR HUD “has a positive 
influence on the operation level of driving” (Langlois & 
Soualmi, 2016). Related to this is that after the takeover the 
driver has an increased risk of missing an exit or a lane to 
take, explained by more limited situation awareness after 
takeover. This seems to be alleviated somewhat with AR 
HUD, where the driver is more aware of the lane change 
that must be made by having direct information augmented/ 
projected. In conclusion in this study, AR HUD does not 
have an effect on the action of takeover, but after it has 
taken place, AR HUD helps with lane change manoeuvres, 
which are more anticipated and the control of the vehicle, 
Table 1. Levels of automations (International, S, SAE J 3016 - Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor 
Vehicles, 2023).
SAE level
Lateral and longitudinal 
vehicle motion control
Object and event 
detection and response 
(OEDR)
Fallback
Operation design 
domain (area of 
operation)
0
No automation
Driver
Driver
Driver at all times
Not applicable
1
Driver assistance
Driver and system
Driver
Driver
Limited
2
Partial automation
System
Driver
Driver
Limited
3
Conditional automation
System
System
Fallback-ready (user to 
become driver during 
fallback)
Limited
4
High automation
System
System
System
Limited
5
Full automation
System
System
System
Unlimited
Figure 3. Usability score, trust, usefulness and satisfaction scores (Feierle et al., 2022).
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
5

--- Page 7 ---
which is smoother (Langlois & Soualmi, 2016). A summary 
of some of these results can be found in Table 2, showing 
the median time and standard deviation for both without 
and with AR HUD.
On the same topic, Gerber et al. (2023) in a qualitative 
subject matter interview with experts, discuss the duration 
of non-driving related activities (NDRA) and how long these 
should and could be in an automated vehicle. Experts agree 
that reminders should be given to keep the user engaged but 
did not agree on a specific frequency with some recom­
mending every minute or two, whilst others stating that it 
should be situation-based. The paper explores how motoric 
states like body posture, sensory states like distractions and 
cognitive states like the ability to task switch. The paper 
presents concerns and argues that maintaining alertness was 
crucial for fallback/takeover. There are various factors that 
fall within this that vehicle original equipment manufac­
turers (OEMs) should do to mitigate risks like limiting phys­
ical interactions or designing the vehicle infotainment with 
NDRA in mind.
4. Psychological
4.1. Inattentional blindness
The next research investigates inattentional blindness. But 
what is it? Initially explored by Neisser in 1975, by giving 
participants two videos on top of each other, where they 
had to count the number of ball passes. Then during the 
game, the male players were slowly replaced by female play­
ers and around half the participants did not notice any 
changes (Neisser & Becklen, 1975). This highlights the 
“looking without seeing” or “perceiving vs attending” (Mack, 
2003).
A comparison was done by Wang et al. where they 
explored inattentional blindness then and compared pedes­
trian visibility with and without AR HUD highlights. It 
found that “AR HUD reduces inattentional blindness when 
pedestrians are augmented but encourages inattentional 
blindness when pedestrians are not augmented.” (Wang 
et al., 2022) It goes into looking at high and low workloads 
and found that high workload through AR HUD induces 
inattentional blindness (Chen et al., 2023; Smith et al., 2021; 
Wang et al., 2022), which will need to be considered in 
future implementations with countermeasures. It covers 3 
types of augmented conditions listed below with the results 
shown in Table 3. The table shows that if AR HUD is used 
to highlight everything but pedestrians, it causes the most 
inattentional blindness, but if in addition it highlights pedes­
trians then it is the best performer in reducing inattentional 
blindness.

No AR HUD,

AR HUD-NP for highlighting with bounding boxes traf­
fic lights, road signs and vehicles

AR HUD-P for highlighting all of the above in addition 
to pedestrians
This research also used AR bounding boxes that can dir­
ect drivers’ attention to the pedestrians or in the previous 
example landmarks (Bark et al., 2014; Schneider, 2021; 
Wang et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2009). One gap it raises is that 
no research has examined the effect of cognitive loads on 
the occurrence of inattentional blindness in AR HUD driv­
ing tasks (Wang et al., 2022).
4.2. Cognitive load
A study around driving performance and cognitive load 
found that “AR-HUD with interfaces that conform to 
human-computer interaction principles and visual design 
rules could improve cognitive resource allocation and pro­
mote driving safety” (Ma et al., 2021). The research went 
into measuring gazes, blink frequency, steering amongst 
other values comparing it between no AR HUD and two 
different versions of AR HUD. It found that sweeping, 
blinking and vehicle motion measurements could be enhanc­
ing cognitive resource efficiency with the use of AR HUD. 
However, “an overly monolithic and centralised design 
would hinder drivers’ driving performance” (Ma et al., 
2021). This means that the study could not fully answer the 
question around AR HUD and driving performance. It went 
onto explain the importance of the previously mentions 
human-computer interaction principles and how AR HUD 
must be very carefully designed in order to facilitate early 
detection of hazards and improve drivers’ performance. In 
order to achieve this the study suggests that this research 
should help promote a standardised AR HUD interface (Ma 
et al., 2021). Other sources highlighted that AR HUD can 
help reduce cognitive load when designed correctly 
(Bauerfeind et al., 2021; Bram-Larbi et al., 2021; Cheng 
et al., 2023; Schneider, 2021; Teng et al., 2023). Although, 
some others have highlighted the opposite, when the system 
designed incorrectly either with type of graphics used 
Table 2. Takeover/handover times (Langlois & Soualmi, 2016).
Event
Without AR HUD
With AR HUD
P value
Duration between takeover request and hands on wheel
M ¼ 3.12s SD ¼ 1.24s
M ¼ 3.13s SD ¼ 1.42s
0.645
Duration between takeover request and pressing a button
M ¼ 4.63s SD ¼ 1.87s
M ¼ 5.09s SD ¼ 2.58s
0.24
Duration between hands on the wheel and pressing a button
M ¼ 1.49s SD ¼ 1.63s
M ¼ 1.44s SD ¼ 1.36s
0.262
Duration between takeover request and the first action on a pedal
M ¼ 7.55s SD ¼ 4.47s
M ¼ 8.95s SD ¼ 7.83s
0.301
Duration between hands on wheel and the first action of the accelerator pedal
M ¼ 4.63s SD ¼ 3.18s
M ¼ 5.12s SD ¼ 3.25s
0.872
Duration between hands on wheel and the first action of the brake pedal
M ¼ 14.01s SD ¼ 10.65s
M ¼ 11.68s SD ¼ 9.25s
0.576
Table 3. Showing inattentional blindness incidents with and without AR HUD 
(Wang et al., 2022).
Augmented condition
Incidence of inattentional blindness (%)
No AR-HUD
47.75
AR HUD-NP
63.25
AR HUD-P
32.48
6
M. WINKLER AND M. SOLEIMANI

--- Page 8 ---
(Schneider, 2021) or quantity of information (Feierle et al., 
2019). Clearly then, more user trials are required for a 
definitive answer regarding cognitive load, one which has 
been highlighted as a difficult subject to measure (de 
Oliveira Faria, 2020). Especially when some uses could 
include AR projected advertisements (Wang et al., 2024), 
further increasing the amount of information that could be 
displayed. This workload could be measured and contrasted 
against traditional HUD with the Detection Response Task 
method which combines reaction times and misses (Maag 
et al., 2023).
4.3. Trust
Von Sawitzky et al. (2019) in their study found that system 
transparency is one of the main ways to increase trust. This 
includes elements such as indication on the AR HUD with 
an arrow of an upcoming turn, which was explained as a 
twofold benefit. The indication reassures participants that 
automated driving is still active, but also allows them to pre­
pare for turns physically which can aid with reducing poten­
tial motion sickness. They explain that previewing upcoming 
navigations is more advantageous than real-time indication 
which might not be processed fast enough. This point goes 
back to cognitive load and shows that perhaps it is better to 
give user upcoming information on AR HUD rather than 
real time guidance. The study found that in order to reach a 
high level of trust only world-fixed items are needed to be 
displayed on AR HUD (for example, the route that a vehicle 
should take like the next turn) since the information is over­
layed on fixed positions of the road or explanatory informa­
tion (Colley et al., 2023; Koo et al., 2015). Other items such 
as map or a preview map can be in other displays such as 
digital driver display or infotainment, as they do not directly 
correlate with real-world objects or structures. Additional 
point raised was regarding seating position, as future auto­
mated vehicles might shift drivers seating position, in which 
case further study should be completed on how that shift 
affects trust and their field of view. Abdi et al. (2015) pro­
posed an Augmented Reality traffic information system. The 
paper mainly focused on the technical aspects of implemen­
tation and computational costs; however, it did cover some 
elements around users. The paper advises AR HUD to be 
used to show the status of driver assistance systems focusing 
on the direct field of view. The proposal highlights that this 
method increases safety and builds trust with the users. 
Although with these types of projections, there is a chance 
that AR HUD incorrectly labels or misses elements. In those 
cases, the paper did not find it to impair drivers’ responses 
even if they were missed. Other sources claim that visualis­
ing all views including windshield and side windows, as a 
user might not be familiar with all the sensors within the 
car, and this could increase trust (Colley et al., 2022). On 
this point there is always some level of uncertainty with 
labels. Research into uncertainty highlights that it might be 
advantageous to be upfront with the user and represent the 
detected visual elements with some level of uncertainty dis­
play, but also that designers should be careful in 
implementation, especially in critical situations (Jung et al., 
2015). Although real-time uncertainty is difficult, using deep 
learning applications the industry can advance and make 
use of high-speed quantification methods to enable uncer­
tainty displays (Wang et al., 2024).
4.4. Anxiety
From a psychological perspective and effects around using 
AR HUD system, Hwang et al, conducted a study around 
these effects and found that with AR HUD, individuals with 
anti-personal anxiety might benefit from AR HUD systems 
where the system increases relaxation. The study had its lim­
itations such as limited number of participants and using a 
simulation where the keyboard was used for breaking 
instead of an actual simulation with pedals, therefore more 
research is suggested not only around visual safety and 
effectiveness, but also the psychological factors AR HUD 
systems might help with (Hwang et al., 2016). Issues around 
anxiety could be coupled with models proposed which 
detects driver emotions (Li et al., 2022) and some actions 
that can be done to address them (Liu et al., 2023).
4.5. Colour blindness
An extremely important topic to expand upon is disability. 
Visual impairment is the main one that could affect this. In 
terms of driving and AR HUD, no research suggested a spe­
cific condition that would stop an individual from seeing a 
HUD, whilst still legally be able to drive. This is true for sit­
uations where the user would still have to complete some of 
the driving tasks like SAE Level 2 or SAE Level 3 
(International, S, SAE J 3016 - Taxonomy and Definitions 
for Terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for On- 
Road Motor Vehicles, 2023). However, for even more auto­
mated applications, the visibility and a wider range of dis­
abilities will need to be researched to ensure AR HUD 
elements can be applied in, as an inclusive way as possible. 
For the sake of conciseness then, this paper only highlights 
colour blindness which is the main issue that AR HUD 
application needs to tackle in context of still being able to 
legally drive. This is a serious consideration as according to 
Colour Blind Awareness, in the UK alone there are approxi­
mately 3 million colour blind people and worldwide that 
translates to around 1 in 12 men and 1 in 200 women 
affected and in total that number is around 300 million 
(About Colour Blindness, 2022). One proposal around this, 
is that AR HUD graphics could be highly customisable so 
that they can have specific colour-blind friendly colours if 
the user has colour blindness. Another suggestion was an 
overlay for traffic lights for instance that helps enhance visi­
bility to those with colour blindness (He et al., 2022). We 
can take other research around this and apply it to an auto­
motive setting. Tanuwidjaja et al. (2014), proposed a wear­
able 
augmented 
reality 
device 
for 
colour 
blindness 
specifically. The paper explores certain issues people with 
colour blindness face, such as putting on clothes that match 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
7

--- Page 9 ---
colour wise or cooking and being able to tell when the meat 
is cooked well as shown in Figure 4.
The device proposed would overlay these items/tasks to 
allow a natural interaction to the user. Interestingly, specific 
scenarios around traffic lights were raised, which can be 
worked out generally by position, however an AR HUD 
interface that overlays these traffic lights could help people 
navigate more easily. An example around painted curbs was 
raised too, where painted red curbs is a no park zone in the 
US, but this is not possible to see with some colour blind­
ness. These could be overlaid by AR HUD, but they would 
only propose this to be overlaid on parking scenarios, where 
a clear intent is made to park either by positioning, destin­
ation or some other forms (Tanuwidjaja et al., 2014). AR 
HUD system must be helpful to the user and aid with col­
our blindness and not overload the whole setting with over­
lays everywhere risking a cognitive overload (Ma et al., 
2021; Park & Kim, 2013; Wang et al., 2022). It is clear that, 
AR HUD can help with colour blindness with overlays and 
perhaps it can help with other conditions that might affect 
people that drive. Certainly, it could help with a whole host 
of disabilities up when SAE Level 4 (International, S, SAE J 
3016 - Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to 
Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor Vehicles, 
2023) is introduced. After that point it is expected that peo­
ple won’t need to hold a driving license or legally be able to 
drive. This is a wide topic, one that requires more research 
and consideration in the future.
5. Design and features
5.1. Obstacle highlight
In another study AR HUD was compared against traditional 
HUD in recognition of pedestrians along with automated 
intervention. It showed that AR HUD had way faster recog­
nition of the targeted pedestrian and shown that it was a 
more acceptable perception of automated intervention. A 
traditional HUD cannot impose a graphic over or around a 
pedestrian, so the study actually found that on average a 
pedestrian warning indicator on a traditional HUD took six 
steps of their gaze whilst an AR HUD only two, further 
backing up the faster recognition results (Karatas et al., 
2020). Other research with 23 pedestrians found that in 
every situation the driver noticed the pedestrian with AR 
sooner (Phan et al., 2016).
The way pedestrians are highlighted is important, as 
shown in Figure 5. Projected paths (virtual shadow boxes) 
generally performed significantly better than bounding boxes 
(Chen et al., 2024). Interestingly, while bounding boxes 
detected pedestrians more frequently, they detected pedes­
trians less accurately. This came at the expense of correctly 
identifying other elements in the environment (Kim & 
Gabbard, 2022), as shown in Figure 6. For more advanced 
use cases and in fact to accurately augment pedestrians path, 
the pedestrians pose, and skeleton patterns extraction should 
be taken into consideration and using a neural network the 
intentions of said pedestrian can be determined (Liang et al., 
2023).
All of the points raised so far highlight AR HUD being 
beneficial in recognition of objects, pedestrians and improv­
ing safety (Karatas et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2021; Wang et al., 
2022). Generally, the results are favourable, with navigation 
and landmark recognition being praised (Bolton et al., 2015; 
Phan et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2009), how­
ever it must carefully be implemented to actually improve it 
over no highlights (Kim & Gabbard, 2022). As raised by 
various research, inattentional blindness and cognitive load 
is something that needs to be researched more and taken 
into consideration during the design and implantation of 
AR HUD systems (Bauerfeind et al., 2021Phan et al., 2016; 
Bram-Larbi et al., 2021; Cheng et al., 2023; Ma et al., 2021; 
Park & Kim, 2013; Schneider, 2021; Teng et al., 2023; Wang 
et al., 2022). In addition, more research must be conducted 
around the benefits of AR HUD compared to HUD, since 
those improvements are not so clear (Feierle et al., 2019; 
Gabbard et al., 2019; Schneider, 2021). Overall, it seems that 
these sources agree on the overarching principle; more needs 
to be understood in how AR HUD interfaces should be 
designed. One literature gap identified then is more in-depth 
analysis of different types of conditions and scenarios 
Figure 4. Red and pink highlighting to gauge meat rawness (Tanuwidjaja et al., 2014).
8
M. WINKLER AND M. SOLEIMANI

--- Page 10 ---
comparing HUD to AR HUD, and not only that, but several 
different types of AR HUD. Most of these have focused on 
object highlight either with pedestrians, road signs or build­
ings. First of all, these can be tested in a multitude of differ­
ent ways, but in addition AR HUD can have many other 
applications, such as additional overlay for difficult to see 
road marking (Hillen, 2021). Another application as we 
move towards automated vehicles as an industry is AR 
HUD applications in automated vehicles.
5.2. Visibility and 3D
An angle to consider around effectiveness is visibility. 
Specific research by Gabbard et al. around visibility of AR 
element found that AR HUD graphics are prone to colour 
blending, which results in intended colour of graphics hard 
to perceive degrading overall usability. It explored scientific 
backgrounds and suggested some possible solutions around 
colour matching (Gabbard et al., 2022). This is another fac­
tor to consider and appropriate actions must be taken to 
ensure the effectiveness of AR HUD doesn’t degrade due to 
issues around colour. Deng et al. highlighted this by discus­
sing the colour gamut differences between HUD’s display 
layers. These can be alleviated somewhat by colour calibra­
tion, but in addition ghosting around the border of objects 
is worth considering, and it is something that should be 
supressed by some method for example a suggested dynamic 
distortion calibration which proposes a dynamic process 
that contains preprocessing, calibration pre distortion and 
post-processing (Xu et al., 2023). One helpful research in 
the area highlighted a method that uses object identification 
and dynamically changes the colour of the content displayed 
so that it doesn’t clash with real world background like a 
black graphic overlaid with a black car. This or similar 
method could also help alleviate some of the potential issues 
(Lee et al., 2021). Image degradation was also discussed, but 
this is specifically in their research of stereoscopic 3D. As 
opposed to having 2D images with projections in 3D space, 
the research focused on 3D projections in 3D space for a 
more natural feel. Image degradation can happen when the 
users position shifts when using stereoscopic 3D. A “sweet 
spot” is highlighted, along with the comments that further 
work will need to be done to expand this sweet spot and 
minimise image degradation upon normal movement of the 
user during driving (Deng et al., 2021). This raises an 
important distinction between 3D and 2D projections in the 
application of AR HUD. The information collected shows 
that stereoscopic depth cues are more useful than stereo­
scopic AR HUD applications and in fact monoscopic cues 
are effective between 1.5 to 30 m, which matches up with 
where AR HUD would start projecting – beyond the cars 
bonnet. Therefore, it is argued that for automotive 
Figure 5. Example of pedestrian highlight and pedestrian projected path (virtual shadow) (Kim & Gabbard, 2022).
Figure 6. L1 perception, L2 comprehension, and L3 projection of driver awareness of four types of environmental constraints (Kim & Gabbard, 2022).
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
9

--- Page 11 ---
applications monoscopic display is suitable (Gabbard et al., 
2014). In contrast however Bark et al. research indicated 
that 3D system was much easier to determine what stan­
chion a virtual airplane was flying close to in an experiment. 
In fact, 3d seemed to have a significant effect in judging dis­
tance, as illustrated in Figure 7 (Bark et al., 2014).
As mentioned by Deng et al. when we aim to implement 
a stereoscopic 3D AR HUD, we must look out for the pro­
posed sweet spot in which the 3D object, in fact, appears 3D 
(Deng et al., 2021). Not meeting this sweet spot could cause 
the image to shift, conveying no visibility or incorrect depth 
perception, which could have severe outcomes, when impor­
tant driving information or task is displayed. Stereoscopic 
3D also requires more performance, as depending on the 
solution two images must be rendered.
5.3. Size and controls
The interaction and the size of the projected HUD image is 
crucial too. Charissis et al. (2021) in their research found 
that a medium sized HUD will perform better compared to 
a more traditional smaller HUD, utilising more of the wind­
shield real estate. In general, all features of the AR HUD 
that this literature view has explored would suffer from a 
smaller size. For example, landmark boxes or arrows that 
project an upcoming turn would not be able to be displayed 
further away to the side of the scene if the size of the AR 
HUD does not support it. Or an augmented lane keep assist 
could only project lane markings on a straight road, since as 
soon as the lane turns, the size of the AR HUD cannot 
accommodate until the vehicle start turning towards the 
bend and lining up the front of the car with the turn. To 
better illustrate the issue, Figure 8 has been overlaid with a 
green square showing a larger size AR HUD that accommo­
dates turns and lanes as well as upcoming landmarks and a 
red box showing the issue with a smaller AR HUD. The red 
box illustrates what happens when an AR HUD is used that 
is much too small to cater for upcoming turns for instance. 
The scene cannot be augmented to a good degree in that 
example arrow and lane cannot be shown properly due to 
the small AR HUD size. Another issue would be traffic and 
pedestrians. All the positive about augmenting turns, cars, 
pedestrians and obstacles reduce if these can only be aug­
mented at a narrow field of view straight ahead of the car. 
A human factors study explored sizing too, where they 
defined specific size and angle requirements for text to be 
legible (Wan & Tsimhoni, 2021). The larger the AR HUD, 
the better these sizes can be adhered to. It is suggested that 
even warning symbols need to be a certain size to be effect­
ive (Li et al., 2023), therefore the AR HUD size should 
make this possible. One research found that the field of 
view (not the overall size) did not have a significant effect 
on situational awareness (Pececnik et al., 2023). Certainly, 
more research is required around ideal sizes of AR HUD 
interfaces and the effects of different sizes.
Visibility is one aspect, how users interact with such sys­
tem should be kept to a minimum with no “complicated 
menus and buttons positioned in the HDD space or awk­
ward to reach positions” (Charissis et al., 2021). For interac­
tions gestures recognition has been proposed as one of the 
solutions, which might have some benefits without poten­
tially affecting visual and cognitive attention. Based on the 
implementation, gesture controls can have benefits around 
not needing the user to focus on a specific point of a 
touchscreen or button and can do it without that specific 
focus on that point. One negative is learning – as there 
would be a greater learning required in order to learn spe­
cific gestures, how to do them correctly, what each one 
means, but also recalling these gestures (Charissis et al., 
2021). Based on these results show that users can quickly 
learn up to six gestures, however these gestures should cor­
respond to movements similar to interpersonal communica­
tions (Graichen et al., 2022). There is more of a disconnect 
between a gesture achieving an action and a labelled button 
for instance, therefore more research and trials must be 
completed to review the effectiveness of gesture based 
controls.
6. Unaddressed challenges and future trends
One of the literature gaps is around disabilities, for instance 
if the AR HUD has 3D projection and it conveys important 
information, what about users that do not have the ability 
to view 3D content or have reduced/no depth perception? 
How would a 3D AR HUD cater? This is simply one aspect 
that must be considered when looking at 3D AR HUD or 
even AR HUD as a whole.
The visibility of HUD must be researched more, for 
example with sunglasses, which was raised as a potential 
issue within JLR previously. Another topic would be the 
overall design of the interior of the vehicle, that must 
change to accommodate an interior space with no driver 
display. Along with this change, it is likely that controls 
might need researching. The reason being users might 
expect different controls when interacting with large AR 
HUD only interfaces. But this expectation must be 
researched. What feels right in an AR HUD only interface? 
For example, the gesture-type controls suggested (Charissis 
et al., 2021) and their impact. Nielsen can give us some 
basic heuristics that can be used like the visibility of system 
status, error prevention recognition rather than recall and so 
on (Nielsen, 2023), but how do these apply to gesture based 
control? Research around gestures provides some clear 
Figure 7. 2d vs 3d comparison in the ability to judge distance (Bark et al., 
2014).
10
M. WINKLER AND M. SOLEIMANI

--- Page 12 ---
points such as reducing gesture constraint rates to ensure 
more success in completing gestures (Gable et al., 2014), but 
still gestures is simply one possibility and detailed research 
should take place to see how people prefer to interact with 
AR HUD only interface. There seems to be some gap 
around psychological factors, as one research suggested that 
AR HUD could help with anti-personal anxiety (Hwang 
et al., 2016). This could be looked at in the context of this 
AR HUD only interface. More research into passenger AR 
HUD display is needed. A paper exploring different con­
cepts found that passengers would benefit from AR HUD to 
displaying navigation information to aid the driver or 
understand path a taxi takes have demonstrated a high 
demand (Zhu et al., 2024). As well as passengers it has been 
noted that pedestrians could benefit from AR interfaces to 
increase the safety for everyone on the roads (Tabone et al., 
2023).
The main literature gaps I have identified and will focus 
on are identified below. It is worth noting that two main 
gaps have been identified, however they are closely related. 
Size requirements must be understood in order to use AR 
HUD as a main display.
6.1. AR HUD as main display
Based on the available research this literature review has 
explored the evolution of car displays, HUD and AR HUD. 
It compared HUD against AR HUD and explored the effect­
iveness of it. All of the found research has one aspect in 
common: a primary display. This main display would typic­
ally show the speed, and any other main function related to 
driving, be it on the digital driver display or a centre dis­
play. This means that HUD and AR HUD research usually 
focuses on features that are an expansion of the main dis­
play, which other than the speed, could usually provide 
navigation, traffic information or mobile phone interaction 
such as calls (Maroto et al., 2018). The literature gap identi­
fied here is around main display and what if we take an AR 
HUD and use it as a main display instead? Is it possible? 
Von Sawitzky et al. in their research found that the only 
information that they found useful to be shown is world- 
fixed information is information that relates to a specific 
turn or landmark for instance (Von Sawitzky et al., 2019), 
so further research on adding all the extra content from the 
digital driver display would be useful. Figure 9 effectively 
highlights this gap in the literature: what if we move the 
“secondary task” into the field of the “primary task,” entirely 
eliminating the need for a separate secondary task display?
One very important aspect to make here is the size of the 
AR HUD interface, as illustrated in Figure 8, the wrong size 
interface simply might not have the capability to highlight 
pedestrians, obstacles or effectively handle a handover which 
were some of the major positives identified. There does not 
seem to be clear research on the effects of an AR HUD 
interface that is too small. What is too small and what are 
the effects? What about one that is too large? Size needs to 
be researched to a greater extent to ensure that AR HUD 
can effectively be used as a main display.
Currently in JLR vehicles we can display “vehicle speed, 
navigation, cruise control notifications and Traffic Sign 
Recognition data” (New Range Rover Velar, 2024) and add­
itionally based on my work with HUD and the driver infor­
mation systems team within JLR I can confirm it can 
display speedo, gear, media, phone data (like calls), critical 
warning (full size telltale) 4x4i (display offroad widget like 
angle and differential settings).
The first thing that is worth identifying is the type of fea­
tures that would in addition, need to be part of this exclu­
sive AR HUD solution other than the list above. Table 4
contains some of the main features typically found in a JLR 
vehicle and considerations around it. It is worth noting that 
most of these might have research applicable to it, for 
example telltale legislations might have research and so is 
the visibility of HUDs and its effectiveness. However, the 
two together might require more research.
In addition to some research required on individual 
items, there must be more research in the overall impact of 
AR HUD only solution. As shown in Table 4, there are tons 
of content that must be added to AR HUD that are not 
found in today’s vehicles. Therefore, it can be argued that 
the size of the AR HUD area would need to be a lot larger 
to accommodate. Consideration around the required AR 
Figure 8. AR HUD showing lane and upcoming turn (All You Need To Know About AR Heads Up Displays, 2023) with overlay added illustrating possible AR HUD 
sizes.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
11

--- Page 13 ---
HUD size to fit all content might have an effect on the 
whole vehicle experience and safety. Research required 
around an AR HUD that takes up a larger part of the wind­
shield in terms of experience, distraction and effectiveness. 
Cognitive overload must be considered as well as overall 
safety and visibility. If the windshield has so much content 
on it, what if it blocks critical real life driving information?
Overall, the current research state focuses largely on 
digital driver display compared to HUD or HUD compared 
to AR HUD. The effectiveness and safety of AR HUD is 
Figure 9. Primary, secondary and tertiary tasks in vehicles cabin (Tonnis et al., 2006).
Table 4. List of features that would move to AR-HUD only solution.
Content
Considerations
Telltales
The issue around telltales is that they are usually ASIL rated and must match 
strict legislation for legibility, visibility, location amongst others. 
Gabbard et. al highlighted the issue around colour blending (Gabbard et 
al., 2022) and in general from a personal experience I had problem with 
seeing specific colours in HUD of JLR vehicles, which has been discussed 
along with the Human Factors UX team. This is something that would 
need more research directly in relation to legally required telltales showing 
on HUD.
Lights
Part of telltales
Indicators
Part of telltales
Temperature
Text is already in some HUDS with media and phone information, outside 
and inside temperature could be displayed fine. However, when looking at 
temperatures, cabin temperature should also be considered. In that case, 2 
zone, or even 4 zone temperature might need to be displayed within a 
HUD-only solution, risking too much information being displayed to the 
driver and going back to cognitive overload considerations (Ma et al., 
2021; Park & Kim, 2013; Wang et al., 2022).
State of charge
State of charge and Range can go together. Both of these should have no 
additional consideration as they are simple information to present on HUD.
Range
ADAS confidence view
This might need a lot of research. Out of everything listed, this is perhaps the 
most dynamic with constantly moving and changing scene. Potentially this 
would need to be up at all times too, during automated driving. Elements 
to research around visibility and effectiveness.
Eco coaching
Related to telltales.
Notifications, warnings and errors
Currently in JLR vehicles we only have large red triangle in HUD during 
critical warnings. Additionally, to that, the HUD-only solution would require 
all additional messages to be included, so the impact of more text to read 
and smaller graphics must be researched. Additionally, translations of text 
must be considered in terms of visibility and size. For instance, Arabic text 
might not display as well on HUD and certainly takes up more vertical 
space.
ADAS modes
Simple toggle between ADAS modes like low and high. Related to 
notification, warnings and errors.
Driving modes
Text and graphic. Toggle between different driving modes like Comfort 
and Eco.
Volume
No consideration.
Door open warning
Perhaps larger graphics for these but would be related the research around 
warnings with graphics.
Belt reminder
Related to telltales.
12
M. WINKLER AND M. SOLEIMANI

--- Page 14 ---
also researched. Some research findings contradict each 
other, but generally AR HUD is positive from the research 
gathered. However, all the found research results might or 
might not apply when we look at an AR HUD only solution, 
therefore AR HUD in the context of it being the only dis­
play must be researched further.
Augmented Reality Heads-Up Display is a large topic as 
illustrated by this literature review. It covers various ele­
ments from the comparison of traditional fixed HUD vs AR 
HUD where AR HUD showed to be better (Bolton et al., 
2015), however in contrast found that the system must be 
implemented in careful way, since it can have the opposite 
effect with a badly designed AR HUD system that increases 
workload (Gabbard et al., 2019). Most research agreed that 
AR HUD applications must use landmark elements in order 
to be effective (Bark et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2022; Wu 
et al., 2009), and in fact the system application must be 
extremely careful to ensure it does not cause inattentional 
blindness by taking the focus away from elements such as 
pedestrians that should be augmented (Karatas et al., 2020; 
Wang et al., 2022). However, highlighting the right parts of 
the scene is one aspect, because a good interface that follows 
solid human technology interaction principles can boost 
safety and cognitive load (Ma et al., 2021), but a bad design 
would have the opposite effect (Ma et al., 2021; Park & 
Kim, 2013). Further to this, specific information must be 
displayed to increase trust (Abdi et al., 2015; Von Sawitzky 
et al., 2019). AR HUD came out on top of for handovers 
between automated and manual driving too (Langlois & 
Soualmi, 2016). The literature review highlighted other con­
siderations such as psychological factors (Hwang et al., 
2016), colour blending (Gabbard et al., 2022), 2D vs 3D dis­
play considerations (Gabbard et al., 2014), control methods 
such as gestures (Charissis et al., 2021) to name a few.
7. Conclusion
In conclusion, the results show that AR HUD can be an 
excellent system in today’s vehicles, boosting user experience 
by reducing cognitive load, increasing trust, and improving 
safety. However, there is still much research required to fully 
realise its potential. At its best, AR HUD can reduce cogni­
tive load, increase user trust, and enhance general safety. 
Conversely, if not implemented correctly, AR HUD can 
increase cognitive load, worsen navigation, and decrease 
safety.
It is evident that more needs to be done to ensure the 
successful application of AR HUD. Some basic applications 
are already available in select vehicles, with more expected 
to come. Therefore, it is important for the industry to con­
duct additional research and studies. As more automated 
vehicles emerge, the key benefits of AR HUD, such as facili­
tating actions like handovers, have been highlighted.
The ability of AR HUD to provide more inclusive design 
options, such as assisting with colour blindness and incorpo­
rating alternative controls like gestures, could be highly 
beneficial for the industry. The literature gap identified is 
using AR HUD as the only display within the vehicle. This 
concept, while challenging, has the potential to significantly 
enhance user experience, much like the transition from tra­
ditional dials to fully customisable digital driver displays.
Future research should focus on optimising the design 
and implementation of AR HUD to maximise its benefits 
while minimising potential drawbacks. This includes investi­
gating the impacts on cognitive load, safety, and navigation 
in various driving scenarios, especially in automated 
vehicles. Additionally, exploring user interactions and pref­
erences in different demographic groups, including those 
with disabilities, will be crucial for developing more inclu­
sive AR HUD systems.
Overall, the integration of AR HUD in vehicles promises 
to transform the driving experience, making it safer, more 
intuitive, and more enjoyable. Continued research and 
development in this area will be essential to unlock the full 
potential of AR HUD technology.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
ORCID
Mark Winkler 
http://orcid.org/0009-0003-4056-1654 
Morteza Soleimani 
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4956-1469 
References
Abdi, L., Abdallah, F. B., & Meddeb, A. (2015). In-vehicle augmented 
reality traffic information system: A new type of communication 
between driver and vehicle. Procedia Computer Science, 73(1), 242– 
249. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.12.024
About Colour Blindness. (2022). [cited 2023 03 November]. https:// 
www.colourblindawareness.org/colour-blindness/
All You Need To Know About AR Heads Up Displays. [cited 2023 01 
December]. https://www.basemark.com/news/all-you-need-to-know- 
about-ar-heads-up-displays/
Autonomous Vehicles Market to Surpass USD 2324.5 Billion by 2030 on 
Account of Rising Consumer Demand and Increasing R&D 
Investments j Research by SNS Insider. (2023). [cited 2023 03 
November]. https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2023/10/05/ 
2755272/0/en/Autonomous-Vehicles-Market-to-Surpass-USD-2324-5-Bi 
llion-by-2030-on-Account-of-Rising-Consumer-Demand-and-Increasing 
-R-D-Investments-Research-by-SNS-Insider.html
Bark, K., Tran, C., Fujimura, K., & Ng-Thow-Hing, V. (2014). Personal 
navi: Benefits of an augmented reality navigational aid using a see- 
thru 3d volumetric hud [Paper presentation]. Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and 
Interactive Vehicular Applications (pp. 1–8). https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
2667317.2667329
Bauerfeind, K., Dr€uke, J., Schneider, J., Haar, A., Bendewald, L., & 
Baumann, M. (2021). Navigating with Augmented Reality–How 
does it affect drivers’ mental load? Applied Ergonomics, 94(1), 
103398. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103398
Bolton, A., Burnett, G., & Large, D. R. (2015). An investigation of aug­
mented reality presentations of landmark-based navigation using a 
head-up display [Paper presentation]. In Proceedings of the 7th 
International 
Conference 
on Automotive 
User Interfaces and 
Interactive Vehicular Applications. https://doi.org/10.1145/2799250. 
2799253
Braithwaite-Smith, G. (2023). 12 of our favorite retro digital dashboards, 
part one. [cited 2023 24 November]. https://www.hagerty.com/media/ 
lists/12-of-our-favorite-retro-digital-dashboards-volume-one/
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
13

--- Page 15 ---
Bram-Larbi, K. F., Charissis, V., Lagoo, R., Wang, S., Khan, S., 
Altarteer, S., Harrison, D. K., & Drikakis, D. (2021). Proceedings 
Reducing driver’s cognitive load with the use of artificial intelligence 
and augmented reality [Paper presentation]. HCI International 2021- 
Late Breaking Papers: HCI Applications in Health, Transport, and 
Industry: 23rd HCI International Conference, HCII 2021, Virtual 
Event July 24–29 23 (pp. 235–245). Springer International 
Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-90966-6_17
Charissis, V., Falah, J., Lagoo, R., Alfalah, S. F. M., Khan, S., Wang, S., 
Altarteer, S., Larbi, K. B., & Drikakis, D. (2021). Employing emerg­
ing technologies to develop and evaluate in-vehicle intelligent sys­
tems for driver support: Infotainment AR HUD case study. Applied 
Sciences, 11(4), 1397. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11041397
Chauvin, C., Said, F., & Langlois, S. (2023). Augmented reality HUD 
vs. conventional HUD to perform a navigation task in a complex 
driving situation. Cognition, Technology & Work, 25(2–3), 217–232. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10111-023-00725-7
Cheng, Y-n., Zhong, X., & Tian, L-w (2023). Does the AR-HUD system 
affect driving behaviour? An eye-tracking experiment study. 
Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives, 18(1), 100767. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trip.2023.100767
Chen, W., Niu, L., Liu, S., Ma, S., Li, H., & Yang, Z. (2024). Evaluating 
the effectiveness of contact-analog and bounding box prototypes in 
augmented reality head-up display warning for Chinese novice driv­
ers under various collision types and traffic density. International 
Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 1–17. https://doi.org/10. 
1080/10447318.2024.2327197
Chen, W., Song, J., Wang, Y., Wu, C., Ma, S., Wang, D., Yang, Z., & 
Li, H. (2023). Inattentional blindness to unexpected hazard in aug­
mented reality head-up display assisted driving: The impact of the 
relative position between stimulus and augmented graph. Traffic 
Injury Prevention, 24(4), 344–351. https://doi.org/10.1080/15389588. 
2023.2186735
Colley, M., R€adler, M., Glimmann, J., & Rukzio, E. (2022). Effects of 
scene detection, scene prediction, and maneuver planning visualiza­
tions on trust, situation awareness, and cognitive load in highly 
automated vehicles. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, 
Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, 6(2), 1–21. https://doi.org/10. 
1145/3534609
Colley, M., Stampf, A., Fischer, W., & Rukzio, E. (2023). Effects of 3D 
Displays on Mental Workload, Situation Awareness, Trust, and 
Performance Assessment in Automated Vehicles [Paper presentation]. 
Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Mobile and 
Ubiquitous Multimedia (pp. 134–144). https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3626705.3627786
de Oliveira Faria, N. (2020). Evaluating automotive augmented reality 
head-up display effects on driver performance and distraction [Paper 
presentation]. 2020 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D 
User Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW). IEEE. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/VRW50115.2020.00128
Deng, N., Ye, J., Chen, N., & Yang, X. (2021). Towards stereoscopic 
on-vehicle AR-HUD. The Visual Computer, 37(9–11), 2527–2538. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-021-02209-z
Detjen, H., Faltaous, S., Keppel, J., Prochazka, M., Gruenefeld, U., 
Sadeghian, S., & Schneegass, S. (2022). Investigating the Influence of 
Gaze-and Context-Adaptive Head-up Displays on Take-Over Requests 
[Paper presentation]. Proceedings of the 14th International 
Conference 
on 
Automotive 
User 
Interfaces 
and 
Interactive 
Vehicular 
Applications 
(pp. 
108–118). 
https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3543174.3546089
Feierle, A., Beller, D., & Bengler, K. (2019). Head-up displays in urban 
partially automated driving: Effects of using augmented reality. In 2019 
IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC). IEEE.
Feierle, A., Schlichtherle, F., & Bengler, K. (2022). Augmented reality 
head-up display: a visual support during malfunctions in partially auto­
mated driving? IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation 
Systems, 23(5), 4853–4865. https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2021.3119774
Gabbard, J. L., Fitch, G. M., & Kim, H. (2014). Behind the glass: 
Driver challenges and opportunities for AR automotive applications. 
Proceedings of the IEEE, 102(2), 124–136. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
JPROC.2013.2294642
Gabbard, J. L., Smith, M., Merenda, C., Burnett, G., & Large, D. R. 
(2022). A perceptual color-matching method for examining color 
blending in augmented reality head-up display graphics. IEEE 
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 28(8), 2834– 
2851. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2020.3044715
Gabbard, J. L., Smith, M., Tanous, K., Kim, H., & Jonas, B. (2019). AR 
drivesim: An immersive driving simulator for augmented reality 
head-up display research. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 6(1), 98. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2019.00098
Gable, T. M., May, K. R., & Walker, B. N. (2014). Applying popular 
usability heuristics to gesture interaction in the vehicle [Paper presen­
tation]. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 6th International Conference 
on 
Automotive 
User 
Interfaces 
and 
Interactive 
Vehicular 
Applications. https://doi.org/10.1145/2667239.2667298
Gerber, M. A., Schroeter, R., & Ho, B. (2023). A human factors per­
spective on how to keep SAE Level 3 conditional automated driving 
safe. Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives, 22(1), 
100959. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trip.2023.100959
Graichen, L., Graichen, M., & Krems, J. F. (2022). Effects of gesture- 
based interaction on driving behavior: A driving simulator study 
using the projection-based vehicle-in-the-loop. Human Factors, 
64(2), 324–342. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720820943284
He, P., Li, Y., & Li, N. (2022). Augmented reality head up display (AR 
HUD) system for the electric vehicles (EV) color-blind drivers. 
International Journal of Education and Technology, 3(2), 53–56. 
https://bit.ly/3oAR7lw
Hillen, M. F. (2021). Following a virtual lead-vehicle: Examining differ­
ent world-fixed AR HUD concepts for car navigation.
Husár, J., Hrehova, S., Knapčíková, L., & Trojanowska, J. (2022). 
Comparison of the Principles of Head-Up Display Technologies 
forthe Implementation of Augmented Reality in the Automotive 
Industry: AStudy. In EAI International conference on management of 
manufacturing 
systems 
(pp. 
15–29). 
Springer 
International 
Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-22719-6_2
Hwang, Y., Park, B. J., & Kim, K. H. (2016). Effects of augmented-real­
ity head-up display system use on risk perception and psychological 
changes of drivers. Etri Journal, 38(4), 757–766. https://doi.org/10. 
4218/etrij.16.0115.0770
International, S, SAE J 3016 - Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms 
Related to Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor 
Vehicles. (2023).
Jarrett, D. N. (2017). Cockpit engineering. Routledge.
Jing, C., Shang, C., Yu, D., Chen, Y., & Zhi, J. (2022). The impact of 
different AR-HUD virtual warning interfaces on the takeover per­
formance and visual characteristics of autonomous vehicles. Traffic 
Injury Prevention, 23(5), 277–282. https://doi.org/10.1080/15389588. 
2022.2055752
Johnson, J. (2019). The past and future of the head-up display, the ori­
ginal augmented reality. [cited 2024 24 November]. https://nymag. 
com/intelligencer/2019/01/the-past-and-future-of-the-head-up-dis­
play.html
Jung, M. F., Sirkin, D., Gür, T. M., & Steinert, M. (2015). Displayed 
uncertainty improves driving experience and behavior: The case of 
range anxiety in an electric car [Paper presentation]. Proceedings of 
the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing 
Systems 
(pp. 
2201–2210). 
https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
2702123.2702479
Karatas, N., Tanaka, T., Fujikakc, K., Yoshihara, Y., Kanamori, H., 
Fuwamoto, Y., & Yoshida, M. (2020). Evaluation of AR-HUD inter­
face during an automated intervention in manual driving [Paper 
presentation]. 2020 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) (pp. 
2158–2164). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/IV47402.2020.9304610
Kettle, L., & Lee, Y.-C. (2022). Augmented reality for vehicle-driver 
communication: A systematic review. Safety, 8(4), 84. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/safety8040084
Kim, H., & Gabbard, J. L. (2022). Assessing distraction potential of 
augmented reality head-up displays for vehicle drivers. Human 
Factors, 64(5), 852–865. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720819844845
14
M. WINKLER AND M. SOLEIMANI

--- Page 16 ---
Koo, J., Kwac, J., Ju, W., Steinert, M., Leifer, L., & Nass, C. (2015). 
Why did my car just do that? Explaining semi-autonomous driving 
actions to improve driver understanding, trust, and performance. 
International Journal on Interactive Design and Manufacturing 
(IJIDeM), 9(4), 269–275. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12008-014-0227-2
Langlois, S., & Soualmi, B. (2016). Augmented reality versus classical 
HUD to take over from automated driving: An aid to smooth reac­
tions and to anticipate maneuvers [Paper presentation]. 2016 IEEE 
19th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems 
(ITSC). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ITSC.2016.7795767
Lee, J., Koo, J., Park, J., & Lee, M. C. (2021). Vehicle Augmented 
Reality Head-up Display information visualization enhancement algo­
rithm 
and 
system 
[Paper 
presentation]. 
2021 
International 
Conference on Information and Communication Technology 
Convergence (ICTC) (pp. 701–706). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
ICTC52510.2021.9620873
Li, W., Qiu, T., Zhang, J., & Xue, C. (2023). A Visual Study of 
Automotive Augmented Reality Head Up Display Warning Signals 
[Paper presentation]. 2023 4th International Conference on 
Intelligent Design (ICID) (pp. 156–161). IEEE. https://doi.org/10. 
1109/ICID60307.2023.10396762
Li, W., Zeng, G., Zhang, J., Xu, Y., Xing, Y., Zhou, R., Guo, G., Shen, 
Y., Cao, D., & Wang, F.-Y. (2022). Cogemonet: A cognitive-feature- 
augmented driver emotion recognition model for smart cockpit. 
IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems, 9(3), 667–678. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSS.2021.3127935
Liang, Y., Zheng, P., & Xia, L. (2023). A visual reasoning-based 
approach for driving experience improvement in the AR-assisted 
head-up displays. Advanced Engineering Informatics, 55(1), 101888. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2023.101888
Liu, W., Zhu, Y., Huang, R., Ohashi, T., Auernhammer, J., Zhang, X., 
Shi, C., & Wang, L. (2023). Designing interactive glazing through an 
engineering psychology approach: Six augmented reality scenarios 
that envision future car human-machine interface. Virtual Reality & 
Intelligent Hardware, 5(2), 157–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vrih. 
2022.07.004
Ma, X., Jia, M., Hong, Z., Kwok, A. P. K., & Yan, M. (2021). Does aug­
mented-reality head-up display help? A preliminary study on driving 
performance through a VR-simulated eye movement analysis. IEEE 
Access, 
9(1), 
129951–129964. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021. 
3112240
Maag, C., Sch€omig, N., Naujoks, F., Karl, I., Keinath, A., & Neukum, 
A. (2023). Measuring workload effects of augmented reality head-up 
displays using detection response task. Transportation Research Part 
F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 92(1), 201–219. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.trf.2022.11.010
Mack, A. (2003). Inattentional blindness: Looking without seeing. 
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12(5), 180–184. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/1467-8721.01256
Maroto, M., Caño, E., González, P., Villegas, D. (2018). Head-up 
Displays (HUD) in driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.08383. https:// 
doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1803.08383
National Travel Survey. (2021). [cited 2023 29 August]. https://www. 
gov.uk/government/statistics/national-travel-survey-2021
Neisser, U., & Becklen, R. (1975). Selective looking: Attending to visu­
ally specified events. Cognitive Psychology, 7(4), 480–494. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/0010-0285(75)90019-5
New Range Rover Velar. (2024). [cited 2023 14 November]. https://buil­
dyour.landrover.com/lr2/r/interior/headup_display/en_xi/l560_k18/ 
4avlx/a-3sd6_sp0/
Nielsen, J. (2023). 10 usability heuristics for user interface design. [cited 
2023 17 November]. https://www.nngroup.com/articles/ten-usability- 
heuristics/
Park, H. S., Park, M. W., Won, K. H., Kim, K., & Jung, S. K. (2013). 
In-vehicle AR-HUD system to provide driving-safety information. 
ETRI Journal, 35(6), 1038–1047. https://doi.org/10.4218/etrij.13.2013. 
0041
Park, H., & Kim, K-h. (2013). Efficient information representation 
method for driver-centered AR-HUD system. In Design, User 
Experience, and Usability. User Experience in Novel Technological 
Environments: Second International Conference, DUXU 2013, Held as 
Part of HCI International 2013, Las Vegas, NV, USA, July 21-26, 
2013, Proceedings, Part III 2. Springer.
Pececnik, K. S., Tomazic, S., & Sodnik, J. (2023). Design of head-up 
display interfaces for automated vehicles. International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies, 177(1), 103060. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijhcs.2023.103060
Phan, M. T., Thouvenin, I., & Fremont, V. (2016). Enhancing the driver 
awareness of pedestrian using augmented reality cues [Paper presen­
tation]. 2016 IEEE 19th International Conference on Intelligent 
Transportation Systems (ITSC). IEEE.
Riegler, A., Riener, A., & Holzmann, C. (2021). A systematic review of 
virtual reality applications for automated driving: 2009–2020. 
Frontiers in Human Dynamics, 3(1), 689856. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fhumd.2021.689856
Schneider, M. (2021). Navigation in the augmented reality head-up dis­
play: Guidelines for the development of AR HUD navigation concepts. 
University of Regensburg.
Skirnewskaja, J., & Wilkinson, T. D. (2022). Automotive holographic 
head-up displays. Advanced Materials, 34(19), 2110463. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/adma.202110463
Smith, M., Gabbard, J. L., Burnett, G., Hare, C., Singh, H., & Skrypchuk, 
L. (2021). Determining the impact of augmented reality graphic spatial 
location and motion on driver behaviors. Applied Ergonomics, 96(1), 
103510. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103510
Smith, M., Jordan, L., Bagalkotkar, K., Sai Manjuluri, S., Nittala, R., & 
Gabbard, J. (2020). Hit the brakes! Augmented reality head-up dis­
play impact on driver responses to unexpected events [Paper presenta­
tion]. 12th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces 
and Interactive Vehicular Applications (pp. 46–49). https://doi.org/ 
10.1145/3409251.3411720
Sun, G., Li, Q., Meng, Y., & Ran, L. (2020). Research on optimization 
of information coding for car dashboard based on eye movement 
analysis. In Advances in Ergonomics in Design: Proceedings of the 
AHFE 2019 International Conference on Ergonomics in Design (pp. 
122–135). Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
978-3-030-20227-9_12
Tabone, W., Happee, R., Garcıa, J., Lee, Y. M., Lupetti, M. L., Merat, 
N., & de Winter, J. (2023). Augmented reality interfaces for pedes­
trian-vehicle interactions: An online study. Transportation Research 
Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 94(1), 170–189. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.trf.2023.02.005
Tanuwidjaja, E., Huynh, D., Koa, K., Nguyen, C., Shao, C., Torbett, P., 
Emmenegger, C., & Weibel, N. (2014). Chroma: A wearable aug­
mented-reality solution for color blindness [Paper presentation]. 
Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Joint Conference on 
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (pp. 799–810). https://doi.org/ 
10.1145/2632048.2632091
Tarantola, A. (2023). Mercedes is the first certified Level-3-autonomy car 
company in the US. [cited 2023 14 November].https://www.engadget. 
com/mercedes-first-certified-level-3-autonomy-car-company-us- 
201021118.html
Teng, J., Wan, F., Kong, Y., & Kim, J.-K. (2023). Machine learning- 
based cognitive load prediction model for AR-HUD to improve 
OSH of professional drivers. Frontiers in Public Health, 11(1), 
1195961. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2023.1195961
Tonnis, M., Broy, V., & Klinker, G. (2006). A survey of challenges 
related to the design of 3d user interfaces for car drivers. 3D User 
Interfaces (3DUI’06). IEEE.
Von Sawitzky, T., Wintersberger, P., Riener, A., & Gabbard, J. L. 
(2019). Increasing trust in fully automated driving: Route indication 
on an augmented reality head-up display [Paper presentation]. 
Proceedings of the 8th ACM International Symposium on Pervasive 
Displays (pp. 1–7). https://doi.org/10.1145/3321335.3324947
Wan, J., & Tsimhoni, O. (2021). Effects of luminance contrast and font 
size on dual-plane head-up display legibility (“The Double 007 Rule 
for HUDs”). Journal of the Society for Information Display, 29(5), 
328–341. https://doi.org/10.1002/jsid.1014
Wang, K., Wang, Y., Liu, B., & Chen, J. (2023). Quantification of 
uncertainty and its applications to complex domain for autonomous 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
15

--- Page 17 ---
vehicles perception system. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation 
and Measurement, 72(1), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIM.2023. 
3256459
Wang, X., Lee, L. H., Bermejo Fernandez, C., & Hui, P. (2024). The 
dark side of augmented reality: Exploring manipulative designs in 
AR. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 40(13), 
3449–3464. https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2023.2188799
Wang, Y., Wu, Y., Chen, C., Wu, B., Ma, S., Wang, D., Li, H., & Yang, 
Z. (2022). Inattentional blindness in augmented reality head-up dis­
play-assisted driving. International Journal of Human–Computer 
Interaction, 38(9), 837–850. https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2021. 
1970434
Ward, N. J., & Parkes, A. (1994). Head-up displays and their automo­
tive application: An overview of human factors issues affecting 
safety. Accident; Analysis and Prevention, 26(6), 703–717. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/0001-4575(94)90049-3
Waymo. (2023). [cited 2023 29 October]. https://waymo.com/
Wu, W., Blaicher, F., Yang, J., Seder, T., & Cui, D. (2009). A prototype 
of landmark-based car navigation using a full-windshield head-up 
display system [Paper presentation]. Proceedings of the 2009 
Workshop on Ambient Media Computing (pp. 21–28). https://doi. 
org/10.1145/1631005.1631012
Wu, Z., Zhao, L., Liu, G., Chai, J., Huang, J., & Ai, X. (2024). The 
effect of AR-HUD takeover assistance types on driver situation 
awareness in highly automated driving: A 360-degree panorama 
experiment. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 
40(20), 6492–6509. https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2023.2254645
Xu, N., Yu, F., Xu, J., Jin, D., Feng, H., Xu, Z., Li, Q., & Chen, Y. 
(2023). HUDNet: A dynamic calibration method for automotive 
augmented reality head-up-displays. Displays, 78(1), 102453. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.displa.2023.102453
Zhu, Y., Geng, Y., Huang, R., Zhang, X., Wang, L., & Liu, W. (2024). 
Driving towards the future: Exploring human-centered design and 
experiment of glazing projection display systems for autonomous 
vehicles. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 
40(15), 4087–4102. https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2023.2209836  
About the authors
Mark Winkler specialises in digital driver displays within the onboard 
HMI software team at JLR. He holds a BSc in Computer Science from 
De Montfort University and is pursuing a Level 7 Diploma in Smart, 
Connected and Autonomous Vehicles (SCAV) at the University of 
Warwick.
Morteza Soleimani, Assistant Professor at WMG, University of 
Warwick, specialises in intelligent vehicles and advanced automotive 
systems. Holding a PhD in Mechanical and Automotive Engineering, 
his expertise includes diagnostics, prognostics, and reliability engineer­
ing. His current research focuses on enhancing the functional safety 
and reliability of intelligent and automated vehicles.
16
M. WINKLER AND M. SOLEIMANI
