ARive

Citation for published version (APA):
Wang, C., Chu, D., & Martens, M. (2025). ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk Zone
Detection. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, 9(1), Article
20. https://doi.org/10.1145/3712270

DOI:
10.1145/3712270

Document status and date:
Published: 04/03/2025

Document Version:
Publisher’s PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)

Please check the document version of this publication:

• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication

General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.

            • Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
            • You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
            • You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.

If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:

www.tue.nl/taverne

Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:

openaccess@tue.nl

providing details and we will investigate your claim.

Download date: 27. Jun. 2026

 ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk Zone
Detection
CHAO WANG∗, Honda Research Insititue EU, Germany
DERCK CHU∗, Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands
MARIEKE MARTENS, Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands
Human factors such as fatigue and distraction often impair drivers’ ability to gauge traffic dynamics, leading to collisions, 
especially at unsignalized intersections. Augmented reality (AR) technology, particularly through advanced 3D projections 
and wearable head-mounted displays (HMDs), offers a promising enhancement by integrating comprehensive environmental 
awareness directly into the driver’s field of view. This paper presents "ARive," an innovative AR driver-assistance system 
designed to improve road safety by projecting dynamic risk zones beneath other traffic participants, thus providing real-time 
kinematic information to promote safer driving distances and informed decision-making. The research involved developing 
two distinct AR designs and testing them using a fixed-base driving simulator with integrated real-time data communication. 
A user study with 17 participants revealed that while AR projections significantly improve distance maintenance, particularly 
in abrupt braking scenarios, they do not markedly affect brake response times or enhance safety during critical events. These 
findings suggest the need for further optimization of AR design elements to maximize effectiveness, highlighting the potential 
of AR in enhancing driver awareness and safety.

CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Mixed / augmented reality.

Additional Key Words and Phrases: driving assistance system, augmented reality, driving simulator, interaction design

ACM Reference Format:
Chao Wang, Derck Chu, and Marieke Martens. 2025. ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk 
Zone  Detection.  Proc.  ACM  Interact.  Mob.  Wearable  Ubiquitous  Technol.  9,  1,  Article  20  (March  2025),  27  pages. 
https: //doi.org/10.1145/3712270

Introduction

1 
Human drivers may not always be proficient in accurately gauging the kinematics of surrounding traffic par-
ticipants due to various human factors, for example fatigue, distraction, and overconfidence. This deficiency is 
one of the leading causes of collisions related to left turn [35, 43, 48]. For example, when two drivers approach 
an unsignalized intersection simultaneously, traffic rules apply in which one of the drivers has the right of way 
through the intersection. The driver who does not have the right of way must decide whether the gap is large 
enough to enter the intersection without causing disruption and forcing the other vehicle to slow down abruptly. 
Another challenge arises when a driver is following a lead vehicle that suddenly decelerates. In this case, the

∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.

Authors’ Contact Information: Chao Wang, chao.wang@honda-ri.de, Honda Research Insititue EU, Offenbach am Main, Germany; Derck
Chu, d.h.d.chu@student.tue.nl, Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, the Netherlands; Marieke Martens, m.h.martens@tue.nl,
Eindhoven University of Technology, Eindhoven, the Netherlands.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that 
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. 
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 2474-9567/2025/3-ART20
https://doi.org/10.1145/3712270

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

20:2 

•  Wang et al.

driver has to gauge the intensity of the deceleration by the rate of the lead vehicle appearing larger, as the distance 
becomes smaller.

Augmented reality (AR) technology, which overlays digital information onto the real world, offers substantial 
potential for delivering warnings and suggestions about hazardous objects or areas. Recently, the industry has 
been actively exploring AR’s application as an advanced driver-assistance system (ADAS). This implementation 
could provide drivers with additional information about their surrounding traffic environment, resulting in a 
better overall driving experience and improved road safety [37].

Contemporary applications of in-car AR-HUD (augmented reality heads-up display) have the capability to 
provide  the  driver  with  relevant  2D  information,  for  example,  traffic si gns, sp eed li mit, cu rrent sp eed, and 
navigation.  However,  these  windscreen  displays  suffer f rom a  l imited fi eld of  vi ew (F OV) an d ma y le ad to 
disorientation because drivers must frequently shift their gaze from a closer objects (2D information) to the more 
distant driving environment [28]. To address these limitations, more sophisticated AR applications utilizes 3D 
AR projections to present images on the entire windscreen and integrate them seamlessly into the surrounding 
road environment [20, 74]. Nevertheless, it’s important to note that these systems are still in a conceptual phase 
due to the remaining technological limitations [22]. In recent years, there have been notable advancements in the 
development of wearable AR devices, providing an alternative solution. AR glasses or head-mounted displays 
(HMD) have the ability to monitor the user’s gaze and track their line of sight, leading to a considerably expanded 
FOV compared to conventional HUD. While a few car manufacturers have explored the integration of AR HMDs 
for in-vehicle use, these projects have largely remained in the conceptual phase. Furthermore, the majority of the 
driving simulator studies have simulated AR by overlaying graphics on the monitor or by using virtual reality. 
Consequently, there is a lack of empirical studies evaluating the practical use of AR HMDs for in-vehicle use.

To further investigate the impact of AR head-mounted displays on safety-related applications, we designed 
two distinct interfaces specifically tailored for augmented reality (AR) glasses; these interfaces enhance drivers’ 
perception of other traffic participants’ kinematics by superimposing a dynamic red area (a risk zone) beneath 
them through a holographic overlay. In order to verify our concept, we have implemented the interfaces on real 
augmented reality glasses. Moreover, a fixed-base driving simulator has been developed that enables real-time 
data communication with the AR device, and multiple driving scenarios were implemented. Then a user study 
involving 17 participants showed participants were conducted to compare among two designs and non-AR 
assistance. The quantitative driving data shows that participants behaved safer with AR visualization comparing 
with non-AR condition. The questionnaires and interviews results show that user’s have a positive attitude 
towards using AR glass for safety applications in vehicle, and prefer the visualizations which not only highlight 
the risky objects but also project the potential risky area on the road.

Over all, the main contributions of our research laying on the following perspectives:

• We conducted the first user feedback study on a driving assistance application using a real AR headset.
Previous research on AR for driving assistance primarily focused on AR-HUDs and windshield displays.
Although some studies explored AR-HMDs as an alternative, they did not project content directly onto
the surrounding environment. In contrast, our implementation with AR glasses allowed participants to
experience high-fidelity AR content projected onto their surroundings, closely resembling a real-world
product. This approach offers more robust insights into user acceptance of AR-HMDs for in-vehicle HMI
applications, including user experience and mental workload.

• We compared two different designs specifically tailored for real AR-HMD devices, representing distinct
strategies for visualizing predictive risks. These designs were tested in various risky scenarios within a
driving simulator with participant involvement. Analysis of driving behavior and subjective feedback offers
valuable insights for researchers and practitioners to further explore the design space of AR-HMDs in
enhancing driving safety.

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk Zone Detection 

•  20:3

2  Related Work
In this chapter, we first explore how AR is employed in vehicles, focusing on recent developments in head-mounted 
AR devices. We then review AR interface design for driving assistance, and finally examine prior research on 
AR’s impact on driver distraction.

2.1  Platforms for In-Vehicle Augmented Reality
2.1.1  AR-HUD and Windshield Display.  AR is becoming more standardized in the automotive industry due to its 
potential to enhance user experience and driver safety. A number of studies [6, 13, 22, 62, 70–72] have explored 
the technology in various automotive applications, for which the most popular is the AR-HUD to provide vehicle 
information, navigational aid, and road information.

In a study by Charissis et al. [11], an AR HUD has been developed that projected incoming information onto 
the driver’s point of view (POV). The researchers investigated it in contrast to a traditional HDD, using a gesture 
recognition interface. In a fixed-base driving simulator study (n=30), the researchers found a 64% increase in 
collision avoidance through the maintenance of eye gaze on the road. Medenica et al. [44] investigated the 
upcoming AR personal navigation device (PND) in comparison to the traditional street view PND and map based 
PND. Through a fixed-base driving simulator study, it was found that the AR PND increased the eye gaze time on 
the road ahead, improving visual attention and driving performance. Furthermore, the subjective response from 
the participants indicated a largely positive attitude. Another study on AR PND by Bark et al. (2014) [2] conducted 
a fixed-base driving simulator study on a developed 3D volumetric HUD to aid the driver in navigating. The 
evaluation by 15 users revealed an enhanced turn recognition time in comparison to traditional PND. Supporting 
the previous study, they found that the use of an AR PND helped the driver fixating on the driving environment 
more. Additionally, the researchers argued in a second study, comparing 2D-HUD and 3D-HUD, a necessity for 
the implementation of a dynamically adjustable focal plane (3D-HUD) for proper registration of the AR cues.

The leading manufacturers of HUD for the automotive industry, eg., Bosch, Continental, and Panasonic have 
successfully penetrated the market by developing bright tablet-sized windscreen projectors [27]. However, These 
windscreen  displays  have  a  limited  field o f v iew ( FOV) a nd p rojection s ize. E merging d evelopments i n AR 
by companies such as WayRay [74] and EyeLights [20] may overcome these limitations by allowing full AR 
windscreen projection into future vehicles for not only user experience, but also road safety. Nevertheless, a full 
AR windscreen display is still at a conceptual stage for which the remaining technological challenges prevent the 
implementation of this technology in near future vehicles [22].

2.1.2  AR-HMD.  In recent years, there has been significant advancements in the development of wearable AR-
HMD devices, which offer an alternative solution. AR glasses or head-mounted displays have the capability to 
track the user’s gaze and follow their line of sight, resulting in a significantly larger field of view (FOV). In the 
automotive domain, the technology holds the potential to project relevant information onto objects in different 
lanes, sidewalks, or even traffic signs.

Several car manufacturers, for example Volkswagen and Mercedes-Benz, have made efforts to link AR glasses 
to in-vehicle systems to offer functionalities similar to a full AR windscreen display. BMW has built extensive 
experience with AR/MR devices, showcased through projects like the MINI Augmented Vision 1, collaborations 
with Meta Reality Labs 2  and BMW Motorrad’s ConnectedRide Smartglasses 3. The applications ranges from 
gaming, navigation to parking. In the academic field, an initial study using AR-HMDs for in in-vehicle HMI was

1https://www.press.bmwgroup.com/global/article/detail/T0213150EN/mini-augmented-vision-a-revolutionary-display-concept-enhances-
safety-and-convenience
2https://www.press.bmwgroup.com/deutschland/article/detail/T0417479DE/bmw-group-und-meta-reality-labs-stellen-gemeinsame-
forschung-zur-vernetzung-von-extended-reality-geraeten-mit-digitalem-fahrzeug-oekosystem-vor?language=de
3https://www.press.bmwgroup.com/global/article/detail/T0422306EN/bmw-motorrad-presents-connectedride-smartglasses

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

20:4 

•  Wang et al.

conducted by Kun et al. [33], who analyzed driver behavior during video calls with the aid of a HoloLens 1 and a 
stationary driving simulator. More recently, He et al. [23] employed lightweight AR glasses to explore navigation 
applications. However, if the visualized content was not properly registered at the correct location, this is by 
definition not a real AR application.

In summary, while the swift advancement of AR wearables garners significant interest from researchers and 
industry professionals in the automotive domain, the industry’s exploration remains largely at the conceptual 
level, and academic research is relatively scarce.

2.2  AR Interface Design for Driving Assistance
Augmented  Reality  (AR)  technology  has  been  extensively  adopted  to  enhance  driving  safety  by  projecting 
information directly onto the surroundings. Although there are various types of display devices, interface designs 
generally  fall  into  two  main  categories:  either  they  directly  highlight  hazardous  objects  or  they  demarcate 
dangerous areas.

2.2.1  Visualizing dangerous objects.  Directly highlighting the dangerous object can quickly indicate driver the 
source of the danger for further measurement. For example, an AR interface proposed by FCWS by Phan et al.
[52] was focused on marking the pedestrians which may collide with ego vehicle. The system has been developed 
in a simulation setting to assess the effects of AR cues, in the form of a bounding box, on the driver’s awareness of 
pedestrians (DAP). Moreover, The DAP has been described using 3 levels of variables, consisting of the perception, 
vigilance, and anticipation. In the experiment setup, 27 participants tested the system in a fixed-base driving 
simulator. The participants were tasked to follow a lead vehicle, encountering scenarios in which pedestrians 
crossed the road. The dependent variables, such as visual reaction time, the accelerator pedal position, and 
the amount of urgent braking, were analyzed for each pedestrian situation. The results of the study revealed 
significant improvements in the dependent variables using the proposed AR cues for each level of the DAP, while 
not producing any negative masking effects.

Colley et al.[14] who compared four different modalities to indicate the object which may collide with the 
autonomous driving vehicle, also proposed a similar visualization. Two of them are the visualization on the 
windshield display, the rest two are HUD and lightbands on the dashboard. However, the result shows that there 
is no significant differences regarding the acceptance by participants.

2.2.2  Visualizing dangerous areas/trajectories.  Instead of merely marking the hazardous object itself, many AR 
interfaces assist the driver in steering clear of perilous conditions by signaling that the area could be hazardous 
to enter. For example, Tonnis et al. [63] developed two visualization schemes to display the braking distance and 
drive-path using an AR HUD. As most car incidents occur due to longitudinal collisions or lane departure, the 
researchers assumed that providing the drivers with this type of information could be beneficial. The concept 
was evaluated in a fixed-base driving simulator, resulting in some interesting human factor findings, such as that 
increasing visual aid provided an increased feeling of safety and did not affect the overall workload. Another 
visualization shows the trajectory of other road users. For example, Colley et al. [15] proposed an AR interface 
on the windshield display that visually displays the future trajectory predicted of other vehicles, to improve the 
transparency of the autonomous driving system. Compared with 3 variables, color (hue), shape, and transparency, 
in the user study, the results show that color conveys uncertainty uncertainty best.

In summary, the automotive research community has extensively investigated AR interfaces for driving tasks, 
including automated driving and driver assistance, with a particular focus on AR head-up displays and windshield 
displays. However, it remains unclear whether these designs can be effectively extended to AR head-mounted displays 
(AR-HMDs), as no prior research has examined interface design in this domain.

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk Zone Detection 

•  20:5

Impact of AR on Driver Distraction

2.3 
While the implementation of AR technology can enhance the cognitive efficiency of the driver [38], or reduce 
the mental workload [3, 4, 7, 49], potentially leading to a higher task performance [39], studies have also shown 
that it has its potential drawbacks, such as visual clutter or information overload [51]. For example, Horrey et al.
[26] found that the increased clutter with the information overlay did not necessarily disrupt task performance
more than a conventional adjacent display. It was suggested that the interference from visual clutter was not
significant as the driving task is more reliant to the ambient vision. However, in more sophisticated AR systems
that highlight potential hazards, it must be noted that interference can also be caused by the redirection of the
user’s gaze from critical road elements that are not augmented by the system [31].

Méndez et al. [47] conducted a review on the cognitive mechanisms of contemporary use of AR as ADAS. In 
the automotive industry, the implementation of AR systems is expected to aid the driver in navigation and hazard 
detection in order to reduce the amount of human factor related road accidents. However, the author suggests 
that there is a plausible prospect that the implemented system offers little help to the driver, while adding risk of 
cognitive and perceptual overload. It has been concluded that AR information should not be present at all times 
to prevent occlusion of road elements and over trust of the system. Another related implication in the field is 
inattentional blindness, which is a type of cognitive tunnelling, in which the person fails to perceive an event, as 
their attention is focused on another stimulus. The study by Chen et al.[12] revealed that inattentional blindness 
to unexpected hazard is enhanced by AR-HUD assisted driving. It has been found that unpredictable stimuli, 
accidentally superimposed on the AR graphic, lead to a higher probability of the driver ignoring the accidental 
events, and increased their response time. As can be frequently observed, fixed-base driving simulator studies on 
AR-HUD conducting a subjective measurement of the mental workload through a validated questionnaire such 
as the NASA-TLX or DALI, found a high standard deviation in combination with no statistical significance on 
self-reported mental workload [18, 31, 32, 36, 63].

In the research conducted by Kun et al. [33], participants were allowed to place the Skype window at a fixed 
position of their choice. The findings indicate that AR content is less distracting compared to a traditional monitor 
display. In another study by He et al. [23], the authors evaluated four different positions for navigation icons and 
discovered that positioning the icons in the center, directly in front of the windshield, caused the most distraction, 
despite being more accessible for participants.

In summary, the design elements of such a system greatly determines the degree of the interference to visual 
attention or cognitive load. Compare with extensive research investigated the distraction of AR-HUD, the study using 
AR-HMD are rather sparse, especially there is no research using AR-HMD project holographic on the environment.

3  Method
To gain deeper insights into the shape and impact of AR-HMD projections in driving contexts, two distinct AR 
designs were developed and tested across multiple driving scenarios. The research questions and hypotheses for 
this study were defined as follows:

• Q1 - What is the user’s level of acceptance of AR-HMD driving assistance applications?
• Q2 - Which forms of holographic design do users prefer? How do different AR designs influence driving

behavior, particularly in interactions with other road users?

• Q3 - what extent do AR-designated risk areas impact the driver’s cognitive load?

3.1 Participants

The experiment has been conducted with 21 participants. Due to motion sickness occurring in 4 participants, the
experiment had only been partially executed. Therefore, the data of these participants were excluded from the
analysis. The mean age for the remaining participants (n=17) was 34.1 (SD = 6.6) and the gender distribution was

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

20:6 

•  Wang et al.

16 male and 1 female. Moreover, the mean years of driving experience was found to be 15.4 (SD = 7.3), and 14 
participants were daily drivers. None of the participants have participated in a study of similar context before.

3.2  Apparatus
For the experiment, a fixed-base driving simulator has been developed, consisting of three 126cm diagonal LCD 
display panels, each with a resolution of 1920x1080. The simulator also includes a set of 500W surround sound 
speakers, a Logitech G27 steering wheel with pedals, and an adjustable driver’s seat (See Fig. 1a).

(a) The components of the fixed-base driving simulator.

(b) Carla simulator.

Fig. 1.  The hardware and software of the fixed-base driving simulator.

The simulated environment is created using Carla (0.9.12), an open-source simulator for autonomous driving 
research (See Fig. 1b) [61]. In this project, the Python API of Carla has been modified to function as a driving 
simulator. . Furthermore, the software is integrated with various compatible modules, including scenario runner 
and Carla ROS bridge. These integrations enable the execution of complex, repeatable test driving scenarios with 
real-time data communication.

Using the Unity platform [65] and the open-source MRTK library (v 2.7)[45], an AR application has been built 
to be deployed to a Hololens 2. The application receives real-time data from the driving simulator via ROS 1 [54], 
and performs the calculations in real-time to display the risk areas (See Fig. ??).

3.3  Risk Calculation Formula
In order to find a robust method to determine the timing and behaviour of the collision risk zone, the assumption 
has been made that the traffic objects at risk of collision are represented as points and move with a constant 
velocity vector in 2-D space.

A widely known time metric to quantify the risk of a future driving scenario is the time-to-collision (TTC). 
While the metric is successfully used by studies to solve 1-D problems, for example, vehicle following collisions 
or approaching stationary object collisions, the application in 2-D space is severely limited as the TTC assumes 
scalar quantities of vehicle motion [40, 73, 73]. As two traffic objects may not always follow trajectories that 
lead to a collision, it’s not always feasible to calculate a value for the (TTC) to use as a basis for visualization. 
Therefore, an alternative formula has been derived that determines the time it takes for the two objects to reach 
their closest point to each other. This metric, The time to minimum distance (TTMD) is similar to the time to 
collision in approaching 1-D scenarios. However, does not assume scalar quantities and is therefore applicable in

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk Zone Detection 

•  20:7

Fig. 2. The data infrastructure of the simulation setup.

2-D for any conflicting trajectories. The formula for the TTMD can be seen in equation 1.

𝑡𝑚𝑖𝑛 = −

(Δ (cid:174)𝑝 · Δ(cid:174)𝑣)
(Δ(cid:174)𝑣 · Δ(cid:174)𝑣)

(1)

In which p is the absolute position vector (x,y,z) in meters, and v is the velocity vector (x,y,z) in meters per second.
If 𝑡𝑚𝑖𝑛 is less than zero, the closest point in time has already passed. On the contrary, if 𝑡𝑚𝑖𝑛 is greater than zero,
the time and distance to the closest point of approach can be calculated for both objects in order to find the degree
of criticality to base the conditions of visualization upon. Given that the TTMD shares similarities with the TTC
in 1-D traffic scenarios, the critical time values were approximated based on previous studies where the TTC was
accepted as a surrogate measure for road safety [5, 8, 19, 41, 53, 57, 66]. For indication of a safety-critical situation,
TTC values between 1.5 and 5 seconds are frequently found, for which 4 or 5 seconds is a recommended upper
bound of activating a collision avoidance system [19, 41], and 3 seconds for distinguishing unsafe situations
[5, 25, 53]. However, some researchers argue 1.5 seconds or even lower to be more desirable for classifying a
critical event as false positives in a warning system may lead to other implications such as annoyance and trust
in the system [8, 57, 66].

In this study, the threshold for visualizing a risk area is based on the concept of a near collision risk with a
future colliding trajectory and generalized vehicle dimensions. This criterion is applied in situations where the
minimum distance between an object and the ego vehicle is less than 5 meters, along with a TTMD value of less
than 5 seconds. If both conditions are met, the risk area is visualized in accordance with the following cases:

• case 1 - if t_min is greater than 0 AND t_min is less than / equal to 2.
• case 2 - if t_min is greater than 2 AND if t_min is less than / equal to 5.

In case 1, the risk area is represented based on the concept of a near collision, calculated as the product of the

relative velocity and the TTMD, as shown in equation 2.

𝐿𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎 = Δ(cid:174)𝑣 ∗ 𝑡𝑚𝑖𝑛

(2)

In case 2, the multiplication of the relative velocity with a factor 2 yields the distance corresponding to a 2 seconds
TTMD, as shown in equation 3.

𝐿𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎 = Δ(cid:174)𝑣 ∗ 2

(3)

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

20:8 

•  Wang et al.

As for the TTMD value distinguishing a critical and non-critical collision risk, a value of 2 seconds has been 
chosen, which is an approximate of the recommended TTC values from the previous studies [5, 8, 25, 53, 57, 66].

3.4  AR Risk Area Designs
It is challenging to enumerate and evaluate all design elements exhaustively. However, as discussed in Chapter 2.2, 
AR-enhanced driving warnings can generally be categorized into two types: visualizing directly on objects and 
highlighting hazardous areas. In this section, we present two representative designs that cover both categories 
for an initial examination of this topic, drawn from previous research by Wang et al. [69].

For implementation, the two designs are distinct to each other as they scale on a different plane in Euclidean 
3D space. While design 1 scales strictly on the road plane (x,y), which highlighting the hazardous areas; design 2 
scales strictly perpendicular to the road plane (z), which directly highlighting risky object. Furthermore, both 
designs can be displayed on the front or the back of the other vehicle, depending on the relative orientation and 
the direction of the collision risk. Finally, A medium opacity red color has been used for both designs to indicate 
danger in traffic, while minimizing the visual clutter that blocks the vision of the driver.

3.4.1  Red carpet - Design 1.  In the scenario of following a lead vehicle that suddenly decelerates, leading to a 
TTMD of less than 2 seconds, a red transparent carpet is displayed on the road behind the lead vehicle (See Fig. 3).

Fig. 3. Design 1 from a participant’s perspective.

The length of the carpet is based on the difference in speed multiplied by the time to minimum distance. In
case the TTMD is between 2 and 5 seconds, the length of the risk area starting from the back of the lead vehicle
covers a road area corresponding to a 2 seconds TTMD. This results in a distinguishable border between the
areas of imminent and non-imminent danger. The visualization is integrated according to the following formula:

(cid:40)

𝐿𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎 =

△𝑣 ∗ 𝑡𝑚𝑖𝑛_𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒,
△𝑣 ∗ 2,

if 𝑡𝑚𝑖𝑛_𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 ⩽ 2
otherwise

(4)

3.4.2  Virtual wall - Design 2.  In the scenario of following a lead vehicle that suddenly decelerates, a red wall 
consisting of transparent red blocks layered on top of each other, is displayed on the back of the lead vehicle (See 
Fig. 4).

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk Zone Detection 

•  20:9

Fig. 4. Design 2 from a participant’s perspective.

The length of the wall increases until the height of the car as the time to minimum distance goes to 0. Moreover,
the transparency of the individual blocks are higher at the top layers to prevent obstructing the view of the
vehicle. This feature is added on purpose, as the rear window could present crucial information, for example, law
enforcement LED sign, braking light, or the road situation in front of the vehicle. The visualization is integrated
according to the following formula:

𝐻𝑤 =

(cid:40)ℎ𝑜𝑏 𝑗 ∗ (𝑡𝑚𝑖𝑛_𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 /2),
ℎ𝑜𝑏 𝑗,

if 𝑡𝑚𝑖𝑛_𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 ⩽ 2
otherwise

(5)

In which ℎ𝑜𝑏 𝑗 is the object’s (car or pedestrian) height.
3.5  Experiment Design
In this study, the experiment was setup as two separate 3 x 1 within-subjects factorial designs. The AR projections 
(Design 1, Design 2, and Baseline) were considered as the independent variables in each of the towns (A or B)
(See Table 1 & Fig. 5).

Table 1. Experiment sessions and conditions.

Session Condition Town
Baseline
1
Design 1
2
Design 1
3
Design 2
4
Design 2
5
Baseline
6

A
B
A
B
A
B

Fig. 5. Experiment town layouts.

The towns are maintained as distinct variables because the primary aim of the experiment does not involve
comparing or contrasting them. However, given the different characteristics of the two towns, with Town A
situated within an urban environment, while Town B resided within a suburban landscape, the layout of the
towns may influence the participant’s driving behaviour and user experience.

In Town A, the route included more elements, such as denser buildings and billboards, that led to a higher
rate of optic flow and more 90-degree turns, which can increase the likelihood of simulator sickness [24] [55].

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

20:10 

•  Wang et al.

On the other hand, Town B featured a significant change in velocity, as participants transitioned from highway 
driving to a complete standstill at a traffic light after a sharp curve, which could also induce simulator sickness. 
To address the potential issues of these factors, participants were questioned after each drive, and the experiment 
was halted if any symptoms of motion sickness were observed.

Since the concept requires the driver to wear a HMD to view the AR projections, additional influences such as 
physical discomfort or visual distraction may impact the driving behaviour or cognitive load. Therefore, as a 
baseline, a no design condition has been introduced in the experiment. In this condition, the driver is still required 
to wear the HMD which displays no AR risk areas. The only remaining visible AR projection is the speedometer, 
which is also present in the other conditions.

Over the course of a driving simulator study, participants may become more accustomed to the simulator or 
use case scenarios through repeated exposure. Therefore, to account for this learning effect, a second baseline 
session was introduced as the last session of the experiment to assess whether the observed changes are due to 
learning effects or introduction of AR risk area projections. Moreover, in order to further diminish the potential 
for learning effects, the driving sessions were alternated between towns A and B, thereby increasing the challenge 
of memorizing the route and traffic scenarios. The order that was presented to the drivers can be seen in table 
1. In total, 6 sets of simulator data and 6 questionnaires were collected for each combination of AR condition 
(Design 1, Design 2, and Baseline) and Town (A or B).

3.6  Procedure
The experiment consisted of 6 driving sessions lasting a total of 65 minutes (See Appendix). Before the start 
of the driving sessions, the participants had to read and sign an informed consent form. Then, a briefing was 
held in which they received information regarding the procedure of the experiment and the driving task. As the 
participants were invited in the simulator chair and equipped with the Microsoft Hololens2, the participants 
were also given the option to adjust the seat of the driving simulator for a more comfortable driving position. 
Afterwards, a training session was initiated for which they are instructed to follow a lead vehicle for 3 minutes in 
a town with no other traffic participants. Here, a reminder is given that in case of nausea, the participant must 
inform the researcher to halt the experiment. This session was intended for the participants to familiarize with 
the operation of the driving simulator and following a lead vehicle. (See Fig. 6).

Upon completion of the training session, the participants were asked on their well-being and questions left. 
Then, for each of the driving sessions, the driving simulator and the Microsoft Hololens 2 were configured to 
start with the corresponding AR condition and town. The participants were given the instructions to follow the 
lead vehicle while respecting all the traffic ru les. Du ring th e dr iving se ssions, no  ra ndom tr affic participants 
were present in the town. Only vehicles and pedestrians that were part of the scenarios were triggered to spawn 
outside the view of ego vehicle, and moved inside the view of ego vehicle according to the scenarios. After each 
session, the participants filled out a questionnaire. After all the driving sessions, a short interview was held in 
which participants could provide verbal feedback about the experiment.

3.7  Scenarios
From the Carla repository, two different towns (See Fig. 5) have been chosen to implement the following traffic 
scenarios:

• Town A - Unsignalized intersection (2x), sudden deceleration, roundabout
• Town B - Sudden deceleration, approaching slower vehicle, pedestrian crossing, cut-in
The towns exhibit contrasting characteristics, with Town A situated within an urban environment characterized 
by tall buildings, while Town B resides within a suburban landscape consisting of houses and a connecting 
highway. The different layout allows the implementation of specific scenarios in which the concept could assist

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk Zone Detection 

•  20:11

Fig. 6. A participant operating the system.

the driver in gauging the other traffic participant’s acceleration and the risk of collision by displaying the risk
area dynamically.

The following 6 different traffic scenarios (See Fig. 7) were developed:

• Unsignalized intersection (See Fig. 7a) - When the ego vehicle approaches an unsignalized intersection,
the lead vehicle has already passed this intersection, and another vehicle simultaneously approaches from
either the right or the left side, for which the vehicle coming from the right has priority. In case the ego
vehicle has priority, the projected risk area can be seen decreasing in size, as the other vehicle decelerates
to yield. In case the other vehicle has priority, the projected risk area can be seen remaining the same in
size, indicating a constant velocity and no intention to slow down. From the size and superimposed road
space of the risk area, the driver can now make a decision with this additional information whether it is
safe to cross the intersection.

• Roundabout (See Fig. 7b) - In the scenario of the ego vehicle approaching a common roundabout, another
vehicle enters the roundabout from the left, for which the vehicle on the roundabout has priority. Similar to
the intersection scenario, the superimposed road space can assist the driver in deciding whether entering
the roundabout may lead to a near collision.

• Sudden deceleration (See Fig. 7c) - A traffic light transitions to yellow, as the lead vehicle approaches. This
causes the lead vehicle to suddenly decelerate in front of the ego vehicle, which triggers the risk area to
quickly expand in size. This behaviour acts as a salient collision warning, and grants information regarding
the intensity of the deceleration. Thus, assisting the driver to respond accordingly.

• Pedestrian crossing (See Fig. 7d) - A pedestrian crosses the road at a stop sign when approached by ego
vehicle. The behaviour of the risk area is similar to the intersection scenario, as traffic participants are
treated equally. However, a pedestrian is generally harder to notice than a vehicle, for which the risk area
enhances the visibility, and additionally assists the driver in spotting the pedestrian.

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

20:12 

•  Wang et al.

• Approaching slower vehicle (See Fig. 7e) - The ego vehicle encounters a significantly slower vehicle on the
highway. Even when both vehicles are moving with constant velocity, the significant size of the risk area
can indicate a dangerous situation ahead.

• Cut-in (See Fig. 7f) - As the ego vehicle approaches two vehicles in sequence on the highway, an overtake
maneuver ensues, for which the vehicle trying to overtake, cuts in front of the ego vehicle. This significant
lateral movement triggers the risk area to superimpose onto the road ahead of the ego vehicle, which assists
the driver in noticing the maneuver, and granting information regarding the potential of a collision.

(a) Unsignalized intersection

(b) Roundabout

(c) Sudden deceleration

(d) Pedestrian crossing

(e) Approaching a slower vehicle

(f) Highway cut-in

Fig. 7.  Scenario graphics.

3.8  Data Collection and Variables
During the experiment, raw simulator data of all vehicle positions (x,y,z) were recorded at a frequency of 40 Hz 
to ROS bags. Following each driving session, a questionnaire was completed, and the responses were digitally 
recorded with a unique ID and session number. By utilizing the vehicle position data, the variables related to the 
driving behaviour and road safety, for example., velocity, acceleration, and distance between the vehicles, were 
calculated offline using MATLAB [42].

This study examines driving behaviour and road safety through several key variables, including time headway 

(THW), time-to-collision (TTC), brake response time, maximum deceleration, and yield success.

Time headway is defined a s t he d uration t hat p asses b etween t he m oment t he f ront o f t he l eading vehicle 

crosses a specific s pot o n t he r oad a nd t he m oment t he f ront o f t he t railing v ehicle c rosses t hat s ame spot, 
while the TTC represents the duration remaining until a collision takes place, assuming both vehicles persist

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk Zone Detection 

•  20:13

on their current paths and maintain their existing speeds [67]. The time headway reflects the potential risk of a 
collision, while the TTC indicates the actual risk of a collision. Only vehicles traveling with short headways can 
produce low TTC values, and in situations with low TTC, avoiding a collision requires proactive intervention [67]. 
Moreover, The TTC is further divided into the lowest value observed during a sudden braking event to assess 
severity, and the number of instances where TTC fell below 3 seconds throughout the driving session to measure 
the frequency of safety-critical moments [5, 25, 53]. Additionally, the study takes into account the brake response 
time and the maximum deceleration, which are determined by the first moment the driver engages the brake 
pedal following a sudden deceleration of the lead vehicle, to indicate the criticality [1, 21, 46]. By introducing the 
scenario of unsignalized intersections where the driver must yield, the inclusion of the yield success served as an 
indication of the driver’s ability to assess the speed and distance of oncoming vehicles.

3.9  Analysis
The dependent measures consisting of the driving simulator data (THW, TTC, Brake response time, and Maximum 
deceleration), were analyzed using repeated measures ANOVA. However, when normality was violated according 
to the Shapiro-Wilk (S-W) test, the Friedman test was employed as an alternative. As the yield success was 
represented as a binary value (1=yield, 0=no yield), Cochran’s Q test was used to analyze the results. For all the 
reported results, an 𝛼  level of 0.05 was used to determine the statistical significance. Post-hoc tests, adjusted with 
the Bonferroni correction, were conducted for pairwise comparisons, for example, Baseline vs. Design 1, Baseline 
vs. Design 2, Design 1 vs. Design 2. The 𝛼  level in this case, with Bonferroni adjustment, was .017.

To evaluate the subjective responses, which were based on 7-point Likert scale ratings regarding the cognitive 
load  and  user  experience,  pairwise  comparisons  were  conducted  using  the  Wilcoxon  signed-rank  test.  The 
significance level (𝛼) was set at 0.017 after applying the Bonferroni adjustment.

4  Results
4.1  Time Headway
For each driving session, the time headway was measured as indication for the degree of safe distance keeping. 
In the US, several driver training programs [17] suggest that following a vehicle with a headway of less than 2 
seconds is unsafe. To analyze this, the duration (in seconds) of the time headway below 2 seconds was calculated 
for the whole driving session and during the abrupt braking scenario to assess the impact of each condition. The 
duration of the time headway below 2 seconds is represented on the Y-axis, while each condition is plotted on 
the X-axis in Figure 8

As the assumption of normality was only violated in Town A, a Friedman’s test was performed for the data of 
Town A, while a repeated measures ANOVA was used for Town B. The results indicated no significant differences 
in the duration of the time headway below 2 seconds among the conditions in Town A (𝑋 2(2) = 0.57, p >0.05) and 
in Town B (F(2,32) = 0.08, p >0.05). Similarly, during abrupt braking scenarios, no significant differences were 
found in Town A (𝑋 2(2) = 0.35, p >0.05) and in Town B (F(2,32) = 0.43, p >0.05).

Two Friedman’s tests were conducted to analyze the mean time headway (in seconds) during abrupt braking 
scenarios. In Town B, a significant difference was found between at least two conditions (𝑋 2(2) = 7.42, p < 0.03). 
However, in Town A, there was no significant difference (𝑋 2(2) = 0.48, p >0.05) among the conditions. An overview 
of the box plots can be seen in 9.

A post-hoc pairwise comparison revealed that the baseline differed significantly from Design 1 (p<.005) and 
Design 2 (p<.009). Additionally, Design 1 and Design 2 showed no significant difference (p>.017). These results 
suggest that in scenarios involving sudden braking without AR projections, drivers tended to maintain a shorter 
following distance behind the lead vehicle compared to situations where AR projections were displayed.

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

20:14 

•  Wang et al.

(a) THW <2 (whole drive)

(b) THW <2 (whole drive)

(c) THW <2 (abrupt braking)

(d) THW <2 (abrupt braking)

Fig. 8.  The duration of THW <2s for the whole driving session and abrupt braking scenario.

4.2  TTC
4.2.1  Minimum TTC.  The minimum TTC is the lowest value observed during a sudden braking event, as shown 
in Figure 10.

A repeated measures ANOVA test was conducted on the minimum TTC in town A, but no significant differences 
were found (F(2,32) = .14, p >.05). In town B, where the assumption of normality was violated according to the 
Shapiro-Wilk test, an alternative Friedman’s test was performed, and it also revealed no differences (𝑋 2(2) = .47, 
p >.05). This finding indicates that AR projections did not lead to a notable impact on the minimum TTC when 
compared to no AR projections.

4.2.2  TTC below 3 seconds.  Since many ADAS systems initiate Automatic Emergency Braking (AEB) at a TTC 
below 2 seconds and provide warnings at 3 seconds [16, 58], we also consider 3 seconds as the threshold for 
dangerous proximity. The TTC below 3 seconds represents the number of instances where the TTC fell below 3 
seconds during the driving session (see Fig. 11.

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk Zone Detection 

•  20:15

(a) Mean THW (abrupt braking)

(b) Mean THW (abrupt braking)

Fig. 9. The mean time headway during abrupt braking scenario.

(a) Minimum TTC (abrupt braking)

(b) Minimum TTC (abrupt braking)

Fig. 10. The minimum TTC during abrupt braking scenario.

By conducting a Friedman’s test for both towns, no differences were observed in either town (Town A:𝜒 2(2) =
2.21, p>.05; Town B:𝜒 2(2) = 1.09, p>.05). These findings indicate that the AR projections had no significant impact
on the number of TTC occurrences below 3 seconds in either town.

4.3 Brake response time

The brake response time of the driver during abrupt braking scenarios was determined by calculating the time
difference between the lead vehicle braking and the driver pressing the brake pedal. A repeated measures ANOVA
test was conducted on the brake response time, and the results showed no significant differences in either town

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

20:16 

•  Wang et al.

(a) TTC <3 (whole drive)

(b) TTC <3 (whole drive)

Fig. 11.  The occurrences of TTC <3 seconds during the driving session.

(Town A:F(2, 32) = .24, p>.05; Town B:F(2, 32) = .14, p>.05). This indicates that the AR projections did not influence 
the response time of the driver at the event of an abrupt deceleration of the lead vehicle.

4.4  Maximum Deceleration
The maximum deceleration (m/s2) is the highest value observed during a sudden braking event (See Fig. 12).

(a) Maximum deceleration (abrupt braking).

(b) Maximum deceleration (abrupt braking).

Fig. 12.  The maximum deceleration (m/s2) during abrupt braking.

Since the S-W test indicated a violation of the normality assumption, the alternative Friedman’s test was 
conducted for both Town A and Town B. The results of the test showed no significant differences in terms of the 
impact of AR projections on the maximum deceleration in either town(Town A:𝜒 2(2) = .82, p>.05; Town B:𝜒 2(2) =

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk Zone Detection 

•  20:17

.47, p>.05). This suggests that the AR projections did not have an effect on the maximum deceleration during a 
sudden braking event.

4.5  Unsignalized Intersection Yield Success
The yield success is a binary representation whether the driver yielded (1) or did not yield (0). As the unsignalized 
intersection scenario, in which the driver is required to yield, appeared twice, and at different locations, the 
appearances were treated independently, for example, appearance 1 and appearance 2. By performing a Cochran’s 
Q test, there was a statistically significant difference in yield success between the conditions in the first appearance 
(Q(2) = 7.40, p<.03). However, not in the second appearance (Q(2) = 1.14, p>.05).

In a post-hoc pairwise comparison between the conditions, it was found that Design 2 differed significantly 
from the baseline (p<.001), in terms of yielding behavior. However, there was no significant difference between 
Design 2 and Design 1 (p>.017). This suggests that drivers were more likely to yield when influenced by the AR 
projections from Design 2 compared to scenarios with no AR projections at all (baseline).

4.6  Questionnaire
The participants were prompted to rate a set of questions cited from the validated user experience questionnaire 
(UEQ) [34] and the driving activity load index (DALI) [50] using a 7-point Likert-type scale, with 1 = "Extremely 
low", 2 = "Very low", 3 = "Low", 4 = "Neutral", 5 = "High", 6 = "Very high", and 7 = "Extremely high", after each test 
drive in the simulation. To statistically analyze the subjective response for significant differences, a Wilcoxon 
signed-rank test has been performed on the questionnaire data, and a Bonferroni correction has been applied for 
which a new alpha level (𝛼  = 0.05/3) was found to determine statistical significance. The results for which the 
null hypothesis could be rejected (p<.0167) can be seen in table 13f.

From the mean scores of the subjective response for which the participant could rate the attractiveness of 
the system from 1 (very low) to 4 (neutral) to 7 (very high), it appears that Design 1 (𝜇_A = 4.71, 𝜇_B = 4.59) is 
valued higher in attractiveness compared to Design 2 (𝜇_A = 4.00, 𝜇_B = 3.59), and the baseline (𝜇_A = 3.82, 𝜇_B 
= 3.82) (See Table 13a & Fig. 13b & Fig. 13c). However, the Wilcoxon signed-rank test revealed only statistically 
significant differences between Design 1 and Design 2 (p<.0167) (See Table 13f).

When participants could rate the amount of interference caused by the AR projections from 1 (very low) to 4 
(neutral) to 7 (very high), it has been found that Design 2 (𝜇_A = 3.76, 𝜇_B = 3.71) had a larger negative impact 
on the driving task compared to Design 1 (𝜇_A = 3.06, 𝜇_B = 3.59) and the Baseline (𝜇_A = 2.41, 𝜇_B = 3.06)
(See Table 13a & Fig. 13d & Fig. 13e). The Wilcoxon signed-rank test revealed statistically significant differences 
between Design 2 and the Baseline in both towns, and between Design 2 and Design 1 only in town A (p<.0167)
(See Table 13f). This finding indicates a difference between the two towns regarding the perceived interference.

4.7  Qualitative Feedback
At the end of the experiment, additional insights on the participant’s subjective rationale were collected through 
semi-structured interviews. By conducting an inductive thematic analysis approach, various themes were gener-
ated by clustering the common codes among the participants.

4.7.1  Feedback on the risk visualization design elements.  As the purpose of the concept is to provide the driver 
with additional information regarding a risk of collision, the design elements of the augmented reality visuals 
were carefully chosen to minimize the interference on the driving task. About half of the participants mentioned 
a mismatch in the visualization of the risk area and the urgency of the situation. As the size of the risk area was 
directly derived from the relative orientation and speed of the vehicles, the participants could have experienced 
heavily changing risk areas when driving with inconsistent speeds. "The change of risk area is too abrupt." "When 
the car on the right came on the right, the risk area popped up, which startled me. I feel like braking immediately,

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

20:18 

•  Wang et al.

Interference
𝜇 = 2.41, 𝜎 = 1.06
𝜇 = 3.06, 𝜎 = 1.14
𝜇 = 3.76, 𝜎 = 1.15
𝜇 = 3.06, 𝜎 = 1.56
𝜇 = 3.59, 𝜎 = 1.28
𝜇 = 3.71, 𝜎 = 1.05

Attractiveness
𝜇 = 3.82, 𝜎 = 1.24
𝜇 = 4.71, 𝜎 = 0.99
𝜇 = 4.00, 𝜎 = 1.17
𝜇 = 3.82, 𝜎 = 1.07
𝜇 = 4.59, 𝜎 = 1.06
𝜇 = 3.59, 𝜎 = 1.28

B (A)
D1 (A)
D2 (A)
B (B)
D1 (B)
D2 (B)

(a) Mean and standard deviation scores of the attractiveness and interference rating,
categorized by condition and scenario town.

(b) Attractiveness score in town A.

(c) Attractiveness score in town B.

(d) Interference score in town A.

(e) Interference score in town B.

B - D1 (A)
B - D2 (A)
D1 - D2 (A)
B - D1 (B)
B - D2 (B)
D1 - D2 (B)
B - B (A-B)

Interference
NS
0.0549
0.013671875000000
NS
0.159179687500000
NS
NS

Attractiveness
NS
NS
0.015625000000000
NS
NS
0.011230468750000
NS

(f) Pairwise comparison between the different conditions and driving scenarios.

Fig. 13.  Results of the questionnaire data. (B = Baseline, D1 = Design 1, D2 = Design 2, (A) = Town A, (B) = Town B) 

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk Zone Detection 

•  20:19

and that might lead to a collision from behind." Furthermore, some of these participants have also mentioned the 
static red colour to be more fitting to imminent or urgent situations. "The red area makes me feel like stopping 
immediately." This indicates that the chosen colour and intensity might be too strong of a message for non-critical 
situations.

4.7.2  Feedback on both designs.  When comparing Design 1 and Design 2, it’s apparent that the participants 
generally preferred Design 1 over the baseline and Design 2. The majority of the participants (16 out of 21) 
expressed a preference for Design 1, mainly due to its feature of the changing risk area on the horizontal plane. 
This aspect was highly regarded as they mentioned that it aligned between the car’s movement direction and the 
risk area’s movement direction. Participants also appreciated that Design 1 offered a spatial extension, providing 
more informative feedback. One participant pointed out that "You don’t need to focus on the vehicle to see there is 
a vehicle." Additionally, Design 1 was seen as beneficial for maintaining safe distances, with a participant noting, 
"I know how much I can accelerate and brake and would not collide. It was very helpful to keep the distance."

On the other hand, a smaller group of participants (3 out of 21) favored Design 2, primarily citing its advantage 
of being visually less cluttered. Only one participant mentioned a preference for both designs, depending on the 
specific situation. They noted that "For intersecting trajectories, the line redirects the user’s attention to the risk 
of collision." However, for scenarios involving cut-ins or sudden deceleration, the potential collision point was 
already apparent, and Design 2, with its less intrusive presentation, was considered more suitable.

In summary, from a general standpoint, Design 1 appears to be the preferred choice due to its intuitiveness 
and functional benefits. It eliminates the mismatch between the moving direction of the risk area and the the 
dimensional plane, and provides more salient information regarding the other vehicle’s acceleration, which 
resonated positively with the majority of the participants.

5  Discussion
In this section, both the qualitative and quantitative results and limitations of the user study are discussed.

5.1  Effects of AR Risk Visualization on the Driving Behaviour
The data suggests that the introduction of AR risk visualizations during driving encourages safer driving behaviour, 
as the time headway between the ego vehicle and the lead vehicle during abrupt braking is higher than the time 
headway in case no projections are shown. However, the analysis of the response time, TTC, and maximum 
deceleration during abrupt braking scenarios did not reveal differences between the conditions. Therefore, the 
results suggest that the AR projections as shown in this study may not significantly contribute to enhanced road 
safety during critical events like abrupt braking.

It’s worth noting that some previous studies, such as Calvi et al. [9] and Kim et al. [32], reported a significant 
decrease in reaction time when AR warnings were displayed in the case of abrupt braking scenarios. The main 
difference between these AR projections and those in this study is that in these studies, the projections were 
only displayed when the lead vehicle starts braking, or slightly before. In contrast, the AR projections in this 
study were triggered when the TTMD was below 5 seconds, which could lead to more frequent occurrences if the 
participant drove more aggressively. This repeated exposure might have contributed to a diminished response to 
the stimulus. However, further research is needed to validate this potential effect.

In a manner similar to the study by Phan et al. [52], the projection of AR risk areas might indirectly highlight 
hazardous objects, potentially leading to an increase in yield success. This increase could be linked to heightened 
situational awareness resulting from the redirection of the driver’s attention toward potential risks. The data 
from this study suggests that the AR design supports the driving task by highlighting a potential collision risk to 
the driver, as shown by the increased amount of required unsignalized intersection yielding. This finding aligns 
with several other studies using AR cues to enhance the driver awareness [10, 52, 56].

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

20:20 

•  Wang et al.

5.2  Effects of AR Risk Visualization on Distraction and Cognitive Load
So far the results did not indicate a concern for safety related to the addition of visual clutter from AR projections 
or its impact on cognitive load. This is in contrast to a study by Tran et al. [64], where they designed a left-turn 
driving aid using a static red path AR projection in front of the approaching vehicle. Participants in their study 
reported that processing the path demanded a higher level of cognitive effort. Another study by Tonnis et al.(2007)
[63], proposed a more simplistic design of a bar projection in front of ego vehicle to aid the driver in longitudinal 
and lateral driving. In their study, it was concluded that such a visualization did not affect overall workload. It’s 
possible that factors such as the static length or opacity of the projection had a notable impact on the driver’s 
cognitive load in those cases.

5.3  Subjective Response
Overall, the attractiveness of the driving system seemed to be perceived higher with the presence of Design 1 
when compared to Design 2 or no AR projections. When comparing Design 2 to no AR projections, there was no 
clear preference for either condition. From observing the length of the box plots (See Fig. 13b & Fig. 13c) it can be 
suggested that the opinions were more divided in this condition. Since there was a strong preference for Design 1 
compared to Design 2, as revealed by the differences found in the questionnaire data, the order effect (Design 2 
after Design 1) may have lead to a contrast effect that influenced Design 2 to be rated as significantly less attractive 
than Design 1, instead of being rated independently. Based on the qualitative data, it might be that the difference 
in attractiveness between the two designs is associated with their functionality and intuitiveness. As from the 
interviews, some participants reported that the change of size of the AR projection in the horizontal plane felt 
more intuitive, as it was on the same plane as the moving direction of the vehicles. Therefore, participants’ 
perceptions of the designs may have been influenced by how easily they could comprehend and interact with the 
system’s features.

However, the questionnaire data indicates an increase in perceived interference in both towns when comparing 
AR projections of Design 2 to Design 1 and the baseline. This suggests that certain unique design elements of 
Design 2, for example. scaling direction, location relative to the traffic object, or transparency, may have strongly 
contributed to this impact. As found in a previous study by Rusch et al. [56], the AR cues in this study did not 
reveal any negative outcomes associated to interference, for which a similarity to Design 1 is that the AR cue does 
not obstruct the view of the traffic object. Nonetheless, additional research is necessary to thoroughly investigate 
the specific factors that contribute to this interference.

5.4  Limitations
Although this research yields valuable insights, several factors may have influenced the findings and should be 
considered when interpreting the results. The limitations discussed in the following sections concern both the 
experimental methodology and the use of the driving simulator.

5.4.1  Experimental.  It’s important to consider the number of critical events encountered during the simulation 
sessions in comparison to normal driving. The increased frequency of critical events in the controlled environment 
of the study might have influenced the participants’ behaviour and reactions. When participants encountered 
these events sequentially, they may have been more attentive than they would be in real-world driving situations. 
Consequently, the potential benefits of the AR projections, such as indicating significant speed differences or 
sudden deceleration, could have been diminished. Furthermore, since all pedestrians and vehicles in the driving 
sessions were always part of a predefined s cenario, t his e ffect co uld ha ve be en am plified, as the  dri ver can 
anticipate a critical event.

Another limitation for the sake of consistency and validity is the repetitive earth of the scenarios and the lack 
of counterbalance or randomization in the experiment design. While alternating between the towns may have

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk Zone Detection 

•  20:21

reduced habituation, the order effects were not accounted for. Therefore, in the case of yield success, Design 2
may have performed better than the other conditions as the participant may have recognized the scenario and
responded accordingly. Furthermore, since the effect was only found in the first appearance of the traffic scenario,
the different characteristics of the scenario might have influenced the yield success.

In the current setup, AR projections are not compared to other modalities, such as auditory and tactile. Although
the primary purpose of projecting AR risk zones was not to warn the driver in critical events, but to inform
the driver in advance of potential critical events, it would still be valuable to compare the effectiveness of AR
as a warning system against other modalities in an additional control condition. In this manner, the strengths
and weaknesses of AR projections could be assessed to validate the benefits of AR projections to other warning
modalities.

During the study, participants completed six driving sessions in two different towns, in the same conditions. To
mitigate the potential issue of participants recognizing scenarios, various alterations were made to the vehicles
used in each driving session, including changes in brand and color. Despite these countermeasures, it’s possible
that some participants may have still recognized certain scenarios, such as the sudden braking event. This
recognition could potentially affect the accuracy of the findings regarding the effects of the AR risk projections.
However, the final driving session, which served as the second baseline session, did not reveal any significant
results indicating participants’ anticipation of upcoming scenarios.

Since the developed driving simulation environment limited the consistency of the simulation data by allowing
the driver to freely maneuver, the dependent variables could be influenced by the difficulty of the driving task,
leading to irregular following distance for instance. An included countermeasure for this behaviour was to include
checkpoints in which the lead vehicle may wait at certain points until the ego vehicle is within a certain distance.
However, between these checkpoints, there is still room for varying distance in which scenarios occur. A solution
to this is to prevent the vehicles from drifting too far apart by controlling the acceleration of the lead vehicle,
based on the distance ahead of the ego vehicle.

5.4.2 driving simulator. Regarding the handling of the driving simulator, it was reported that the difficulty of
operating the driving simulator differed. The participants required various amount of time to execute the driving
tasks on the machine on an adequate level. Moreover, Participants (8/21) mentioned: "It lacked smoothness. The
frame rate was not consistent". Also the design of the urban driving scenarios included a substantial amount
of 90 degrees cornering, which was found to be difficult to perform, as mentioned by 5 participants. However,
most participants found it acceptable and easier as more time has passed in the experiment. This leads to similar
statements such as "In the beginning it was difficult, at the end it gets easier." "You had to get used to the physics,
then it was straightforward." "After a first couple of tries it wasn’t hard." This effect over time may have influenced
the driving behaviour as the participants that found it difficult in the beginning, may have been distracted by
learning the driving simulator. However, comparisons between both baseline sessions (first and last session)
revealed no differences.

Furthermore, the participants’ proficiency of handling the driving simulator was divided, as their feedback
on handling the driving task ranged from easy to difficult. The maneuver of executing a 90 degrees turn in an
urban driving scenario was frequently mentioned to be one of the more difficult tasks, due to a lack of dynamic
forces which would have been felt when driving a real car. However, the benefit of the chosen research method is
an unconstrained driving scenario, leading to a more sophisticated driving experience for the participant. Thus,
providing a better understanding of the concept in the real world. Perhaps with more training in prior of testing,
or in case of a higher fidelity driving simulator, which includes dynamic feedback on the driver, the difficulty of
the driving task may be diminished for more consistent results.

Due to technical limitations, it was not feasible to add brake lights in the simulation. When there are no brake
lights, the driver could mainly notice a deceleration event by the narrowing gap between the vehicles. In the case

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

20:22 

•  Wang et al.

of abrupt braking, an expanding risk area has a higher salience than a narrowing gap between the vehicles for 
which the effects of the AR projections could be enhanced when comparing to a baseline condition with no brake 
lights.

Finally, a common side effect o f a  d riving s imulator i s s imulation s ickness o r m otion s ickness c aused by 

the visuo-vestibular conflict [30], which affects physical and cognitive performance [59, 60]. In this study, the 
fixed-base driving simulator is paired with an AR HMD to conduct the experiments, which may further increases 
the severity of motion sickness[29]. Out of the 21 participants, 4 participants experienced severe motion sickness 
for which the experiment was prematurely terminated. The rest of the participants mentioned to have experienced 
no motion sickness at all, or mild symptoms of motion sickness, which was mutually consented for continuation. 
However, in a study by Vovk et al. (2018), only negligible symptoms of simulator sickness has been found using 
the Microsoft HoloLens [68]. Moreover, there is no evidence in contemporary research for an enhanced likelihood 
of motion sickness in the synergistic operation of an AR HMD and a fixed-base driving simulator. Therefore, the 
validity of the data affected by motion sickness was treated in the same circumstances as strictly a fixed-base 
driving simulator, although more research is needed to fully account for the synergistic operation and effects on 
motion sickness.

6  Conclusions
In this research, a concept for an AR driver-assistance system was developed. This system aims to enhance driver 
safety by providing real-time AR projections related to collision risk.

Two AR design prototypes of the concept was modelled using Unity game engine and subsequently deployed 
onto a HMD for visual projection. Additionally, a fixed-base driving simulator has been developed using the 
Carla platform. This enabled real-time data communication between the systems, facilitating the evaluation of 
the impact of AR projections in a user study involving 17 participants.

The concept of projecting risk areas may offer p otential r egarding s afer d riving b ehaviour b y enhancing 
the awareness to potentially dangerous situations. Based on the results from the analysis of quantitative data 
extracted from the driving simulator, and qualitative data from the participant interviews, it has been found 
that the AR projections of risk areas during driving lead to a consistently safer distance keeping, as indicated 
by the increase in mean time headway at the event of abrupt braking by the lead vehicle. From the data of the 
questionnaire and interviews, it is concluded that AR projections from Design 1 enhances the attractiveness of a 
driving system in comparison to no AR visualizations at all. Moreover, there was a strong preference for Design 
1 over Design 2, for which the interview remarks suggest that it may be linked to higher functionality, as the 
projection could redirect the user’s attention to the risk of collision. The difference in behaviour may have also 
lead to higher intuitiveness, as the dimension of the projected risk area is consistent with the plane of vehicular 
movement. However, further research that objectively test these variables is required to validate this claim.

During the abrupt braking scenarios, no significant differences were found in brake response time, maximum 
deceleration, and minimum TTC between the conditions. This suggests that the AR projections used in this study 
did not lead to an improvement in road safety during such critical events. One possible reason for this lack of 
significance in the data could be that the change in the size of the risk area at the time of a critical event may not 
have been salient enough to elicit a significant response from the participants. Additionally, the experimental 
design, which exposed participants to a higher frequency of critical events than they would encounter in real-life 
driving, might have made participants more cautious and less responsive to the AR projections.

One of the hypotheses was that AR projections lead to a higher amount of necessary yielding when approaching 
unsignalized intersection scenarios when compared to no AR projections at all. The analysis revealed that only 
Design 2 increased the yielding success compared to the baseline. However, it’s important to note that this result

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk Zone Detection 

•  20:23

cannot be regarded as definitive, especially since it was not observed for Design 1. The observed effect may be a
result of order effects due to the lack of randomization or counterbalance in the study design.

Concerning the assumption of an increase in cognitive load, there was no difference in the subjective response
between the conditions regarding the driver’s mental workload. Thus, the extent of AR risk areas as shown
in this study affecting the cognitive load is negligible. However, the subjective data did reveal an increase in
interference regarding the driving task when AR projections of Design 2 was projected as compared to Design 1
and the baseline.

These findings suggest that future research in AR risk visualization should explore various design elements,
including the formula used to determine the dynamics, the location, color, and transparency of the projections.
These design considerations are crucial to minimize potential interference and address safety implications related
to redirecting the driver’s attention.

Finally, it is advisable to explore alternative research approaches, including the comparison of AR risk visual-
ization with auditory or tactile warning systems, to assess their effectiveness and user preferences in different
driving scenarios. To enhance the experiment design, future studies should consider reducing the frequency of
critical events in a short period of time to improve the reliability and credibility of the simulation data. Coupling
this approach with a larger sample size and randomized participant assignment to mitigate order effects could
provide stronger evidence regarding the enhancement of safer driving behavior and road safety through AR risk
visualization.

Acknowledgments

We would like to appreciate Stephan Hasler to support the analytical solutions of the minimal distance/timing
between ego vehicle and other objects.

References
[1] O. Bagdadi. 2013. Assessing safety critical braking events in naturalistic driving studies. Transportation research part F: traffic psychology

and behaviour 16 (2013), 117–126.

[2] Karlin Bark, Cuong Tran, Kikuo Fujimura, and Victor Ng-Thow-Hing. 2014. Personal Navi: Benefits of an Augmented Reality Navigational
Aid Using a See-Thru 3D Volumetric HUD. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive
Vehicular Applications (AutomotiveUI ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–8. doi:10.1145/2667317.2667329..
[3] K. Bauerfeind, J. Drüke, L. Bendewald, and M. Baumann. 2019. When does the driver benefit from AR-information in a navigation task
compared to a Head-Up Display? Results of a driving simulator study. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Europe
(2019), 219–230.

[4] Kassandra Bauerfeind, Julia Drüke, Jens Schneider, Adrian Haar, Lennart Bendewald, and Martin Baumann. 2021. Navigating with
Augmented Reality – How does it affect drivers’ mental load? Applied Ergonomics 94 (2021), 103398. doi:10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103398.
ISSN 0003-6870.

[5] F. Bella and R. Russo. 2011. A collision warning system for rear-end collision: A driving simulator study. Procedia-Social Behav. Sci. 20

(January 2011), 676–686.

[6] J. A. Betancur, J. Villa-Espinal, G. Osorio-Gómez, et al. 2018. Research topics and implementation trends on automotive head-up display

systems. Int J Interact Des Manuf 12 (2018), 199–214. doi:10.1007/s12008-016-0350-3..

[7] Adam Bolton, Gary Burnett, and David R. Large. 2015. An investigation of augmented reality presentations of landmark-based navigation
using a head-up display. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular
Applications (AutomotiveUI ’15). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 56–63. doi:10.1145/2799250.2799253..

[8] Gerald R. Brow. 2011. Traffic conflicts for road user safety studies. Canadian Journal of Civil Engineering 21, 1 (2011), 1–15.
[9] A. Calvi, F. D’Amico, C. Ferrante, and L. Bianchini Ciampoli. 2020. Assessing the Effectiveness of Augmented Reality Cues in Preventing
Rear-End Collisions: A Driving Simulator Study. In Advances in Human Aspects of Transportation. AHFE 2020. Advances in Intelligent
Systems and Computing, vol 1212, N. Stanton (Ed.). Springer, Cham. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-50943-9_29..

[10] Alessandro Calvi, Fabrizio D’Amico, Chiara Ferrante, and Luca Bianchini Ciampoli. 2020. Effectiveness of augmented reality warnings
on driving behaviour whilst approaching pedestrian crossings: A driving simulator study. Accident Analysis & Prevention 147 (2020),
105760. doi:10.1016/j.aap.2020.105760. ISSN 0001-4575.

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

20:24 

•  Wang et al.

[11] V. Charissis, J. Falah, R. Lagoo, S. F. M. Alfalah, S. Khan, S. Wang, S. Altarteer, K. B. Larbi, and D. Drikakis. 2021.  Employing Emerging
Technologies to Develop and Evaluate In-Vehicle Intelligent Systems for Driver Support: Infotainment AR HUD Case Study.  Appl. Sci. 11
(2021), 1397.  doi:10.3390/app11041397. https.

[12] Wanting Chen, Jiaqing Song, Yuwei Wang, Changxu Wu, Shu Ma, Duming Wang, Zhen Yang, and Hongting Li. 2023.  Inattentional 
blindness to unexpected hazard in augmented reality head-up display assisted driving: The impact of the relative position between 
stimulus and augmented graph.  Traffic Injury Prevention 24, 4 (2023), 344–351.  doi:10.1080/15389588.2023.2186735..

[13] Yunqiang Chen, Qing Wang, Hong Chen, Xiaoyu Song, Hui Tang, and Mengxiao Tian. 2019.  An overview of augmented reality 

technology.  Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1237 (2019), 022082.  doi:10.1088/1742-6596/1237/2/022082..

[14] M. Colley, S. Krauss, M. Lanzer, and E. Rukzio. [n. d.]. How Should Automated Vehicles Communicate Critical Situations? A Comparative

Analysis of Visualization Concepts. In Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 5 (2021, 9.  doi:10.1145/3478111..

[15] M. Colley, O. Speidel, J. Strohbeck, J. Rixen, J. Belz, and E. Rukzio. [n. d.].  Effects of Uncertain Trajectory Prediction Visualization in 
Highly Automated Vehicles on Trust, Situation Awareness, and Cognitive Load. In Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous
Technol. 7 (2024, 1.  doi:10.1145/3631408..

[16] E. Dagan, O. Mano, G. Stein, and A. Shashua. 2000.  Forward collision warning with a single camera.  IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium

[17] Michael, P., Leeming, F. & Dwyer, W. Headway on urban streets: observational data and an intervention to rease tailgating. Transportation

3 (December 2000), 37–42.  2004. (2004)

Research Part F: Traffic Psychology And Behaviour55-64.

[18] N. de Oliveira Faria, D. Kandil, and J. L. Gabbard. 2019.  Augmented reality head-up displays effect on drivers’ spatial knowledge
acquisition. In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting (Vol. 63, No. 1, Sage CA: : SAGE Publications,
Los Angeles, CA, 1486–1487.

[19] R. Van der Horst and J. Hogema. 1993.  Time-to-collision and collision avoidance systems. In Proc. 6th ICTCT Workshop Saf. Eval. Traffic

Syst. Traffic Conflicts Other Measures. 109–121.

[20] EyeLights. [n. d.].  | GPS Affichage tête haute - Moto EyeRide.  n.d.). EyeLights | Affichage Tête Haute Moto.  https://eye-lights.com/.
[21] Z. Feng, X. Ma, X. Zhu, and Z. Ma. 2018.  Analysis of Driver Brake Behavior Under Critical Cut-in Scenarios. In 2018 IEEE Intelligent 

Vehicles Symposium (IV), Changshu, China. 2054–2059.  doi:10.1109/IVS.2018.8500438..

[22] J. L. Gabbard, G. M. Fitch, and H. Kim. 2014.  Behind the Glass: Driver Challenges and Opportunities for AR Automotive Applications. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 102, no. 2. 124–136.  doi:10.1109/JPROC.2013.2294642..

[23] Xiangyang He and Keyuan Zhou. 2024.  Display in the Air: Balancing Distraction and Workload in AR Glasses Interfaces for Driving

[24] L. J. Hettinger and G. E. Riccio. 1992.  Visually induced motion sickness in virtual environments.  Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual

Navigation.  arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.18357  (2024).

Environments 1, 3 (1992), 306–310.

[25] S. Hirst and R. Graham. 1997.  The format and presentation of collision warnings.  In Ergonomics and safety of intelligent driver interfaces. 

203–219.

[26] W. J. Horrey, C. D. Wickens, and A. L. Alexander. 2003.  The effects of head-up display clutter and in-vehicle display separation on 
concurrent driving performance. In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting (Vol. 47, No. 16, Sage CA: :
SAGE Publications, Los Angeles, CA, 1880–1884.

[27] Automotive  Hud.  [n. d.].  Market  Share,  Size,  Trends  -  [2022-  2027]. 

2973,  January  1).  ketsandMarkets  (March  [n. d.]). 

https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/automotive-head-up-display-market-11272971.html.

[28] Richie Jose, Gun A. Lee, and Mark Billinghurst. 2016. A comparative study of simulated augmented reality displays for vehicle navigation.
In Proceedings of the 28th Australian Conference on Computer-Human Interaction (OzCHI ’16). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 40–48.  doi:10.1145/3010915.3010918..

[29] Mara Kaufeld, Martin Mundt, Sarah Forst, and Heiko Hecht. 2022.  Optical see-through augmented reality can induce severe motion sick-
ness.  Displays 74 (2022), 102283.  doi:10.1016/j.displa.2022.102283. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0141938222001032.
ISSN 0141-9382.

[30] R. S. Kennedy, N. E. Lane, M. C. Grizzard, K. M. Stanney, K. Kingdon, and S. Lanham. 2001.  Use of a motion history questionnaire to

predict simulator sickness. In Proceedings of the Sixth Driving Simulation Conference -DSC2001, France. 79–89.

[31] H. Kim and J. L. Gabbard. 2022.  Assessing distraction potential of augmented reality head-up displays for vehicle drivers.  Human factors 

64, 5 (2022), 852–865.

[32] Hyungil Kim, Xuefang Wu, Joseph L. Gabbard, and Nicholas F. Polys. 2013.  Exploring head-up augmented reality interfaces for crash
warning systems. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications 
(AutomotiveUI ’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 224–227.  doi:10.1145/2516540.2516566..

[33] Andrew L. Kun, Hidde van der Meulen, and Christian P. Janssen. 2017.  Calling while driving: an initial experiment with hololens. 

https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:22051165

[34] B. Laugwitz, M. Schrepp, and T. Held. 2008.  Construction and evaluation of a user experience questionnaire.  In USAB 2008, A. Holzinger

(Ed.). LNCS 5298, 63–76.

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk Zone Detection 

•  20:25

[35] J. D. Lee. 2008.  Fifty years of driving safety research.  Human factors 50, 3 (2008), 521–528.
[36] Z. Li and Y. Ma. 2021.  Response and Evaluation of Vehicle AR-HUD Assistant System to Risk Cognition. In 2021 16th International 
Conference on Computer Science & Education (ICCSE), Lancaster, United Kingdom. 153–157.  doi:10.1109/ICCSE51940.2021.9569278..
[37] Yongshi  Liang,  Pai  Zheng,  and  Liqiao  Xia.  2023.  A  visual  reasoning-based  approach  for  driving  experience  improvement  in  the
AR-assisted head-up displays.  Advanced Engineering Informatics 55 (2023), 101888.  doi:10.1016/j.aei.2023.101888. ISSN 1474-0346.
[38] X. Ma, Z. Hong, J. Huang, J. He, J. Song, and M. Jia. 2021.  The impact of AR-HUD intelligent driving on the allocation of cognitive

resources under the breakthrough of 5G technology.  Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1982 (2021).

[39] X. Ma, Z. Hong, J. Huang, J. He, J. Song, and M. Jia. 2021.  The impact of AR-HUD intelligent driving on the allocation of cognitive

resources under the breakthrough of 5G technology.  Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1982 (2021).

[40] S.  M.  Sohel  Mahmud,  Luis  Ferreira,  Md.  Shamsul  Hoque,  and  Ahmad  Tavassoli.  2017.  Application  of  proximal  surrogate  in-
IATSS  Research  41,  4  (2017),  153–163.

dicators  for  safety  evaluation:  A  review  of  recent  developments  and  research  needs. 
doi:10.1016/j.iatssr.2017.02.001. ISSN 0386-1112.

[41] Maretzke and U. Jacob. 1992. Distance warning and control as a means of increasing road safety and ease of operation. In Proc. 24th

Fisita Congr. Inst. Mech. Eng. 105–114.

[42] MathWorks. n.d..

MATLAB - Math. Graphics. Programming.

MATLAB (n.d.).

Retrieved November 16, 2021.

https://nl.mathworks.com/products/matlab.html.

[43] Frank P. McKENNA. 1982. The human factor in driving accidents An overview of approaches and problems. Ergonomics 25, 10 (1982),

867–877. doi:10.1080/00140138208925047..

[44] Zeljko Medenica, Andrew L. Kun, Tim Paek, and Oskar Palinko. 2011. Augmented reality vs. street views: a driving simulator study
comparing two emerging navigation aids. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction with Mobile
Devices and Services (MobileHCI ’11). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 265–274. doi:10.1145/2037373.2037414..
[45] Microsoft. n.d.. Microsoft/MixedRealityToolkit-Unity: This repository is for the legacy mixed reality toolkit (MRTK) V2. for
https://github.com/mixedrealitytoolkit/mixedrealitytoolkit-unity. GitHub.

the latest version of the MRTK please visit. (n.d.).
https://github.com/microsoft/MixedRealityToolkit-Unity.

[46] C. Miyajima, H. Ukai, A. Naito, H. Amata, N. Kitaoka, and K. Takeda. 2011. Driver risk evaluation based on acceleration, deceleration,
and steering behavior. In 2011 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Prague, Czech Republic.
1829–1832. doi:10.1109/ICASSP.2011.5946860..

[47] L. M. Méndez and E. G. Quinteiro. 2018. Augmented Reality as an Advanced Driver-Assistance System: A Cognitive Approach. In

Proceedings of the 6 th Humanist Conference.

[48] NHTSA. 2010. Crash Factors in Intersection-Related Crashes: An On-Scene Perspective. DOT HS 811 366. National Highway Traffic Safety

Administration, Washington, DC. https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/ViewPublication/811366.

[49] H. Park and Kh Kim. 2013. Efficient Information Representation Method for Driver-Centered AR-HUD System. In Design, User Experience,
and Usability. User Experience in Novel Technological Environments. DUXU 2013. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 8014. , Berlin,
A. Marcus (Ed.). Springer, Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-39238-2_43..

[50] Annie Pauzie. 2008. A method to assess the driver mental workload: the Driving Activity Load Index (DALI). IET Intelligent Transport

Systems 2 (2008), 315–322.

[51] A. Pauzie. 2015. Head Up Display in Automotive: A New Reality for the Driver. In Design, User Experience, and Usability: Interactive
Experience Design. DUXU 2015. Lecture Notes in Computer Science(), vol 9188, A. Marcus (Ed.). Springer, Cham. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-
20889-3_47..

[52] Minh Tien Phan, I. Thouvenin, and V. Frémont. 2016. Enhancing the driver awareness of pedestrian using augmented reality cues. In
2016 IEEE 19th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC). 1298–1304. doi:10.1109/ITSC.2016.7795724..
[53] Xiaobo Qu, Yan Kuang, Erwin Oh, and Sheng Jin. 2014. Safety Evaluation for Expressways: A Comparative Study for Macroscopic and

Microscopic Indicators. Traffic injury prevention 15 (2014), 89–93.
[54] Robot operating system. [n. d.]. ROS. n.d. https://www.ros.org/.
[55] C. Roe, T. Brown, and G. Watson. 2007. Factors associated with simulator sickness in a high-fidelity simulator. Education 251, 5A (2007).
[56] Michelle L. Rusch, Mark C. Schall, Patrick Gavin, John D. Lee, Jeffrey D. Dawson, Shaun Vecera, and Matthew Rizzo. 2013. Directing
driver attention with augmented reality cues. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour 16 (2013), 127–137.
doi:10.1016/j.trf.2012.08.007. ISSN 1369-8478.

[57] T. Sayed, M. H. Zaki, and J. Autey. 2013. Automated safety diagnosis of vehicle–bicycle interactions using computer vision analysis.

Safety science 59 (2013), 163–172.

[58] S. Shalev-Shwartz, S. Shammah, and A. Shashua. 2018. Vision zero: on a provable method for eliminating roadway accidents without

compromising traffic throughput. (2018). arXiv:1901.05022 ArXiv Preprint.

[59] Sarah Sharples, Sue Cobb, Amanda Moody, and John R. Wilson. 2008. Virtual reality induced symptoms and effects (VRISE): Comparison
of head mounted display (HMD), desktop and projection display systems. Displays 29, 2 (2008), 58–69. doi:10.1016/j.displa.2007.09.005.
ISSN 0141-9382.

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

20:26 

•  Wang et al.

[60] J. Smyth, S. Birrell, A. Mouzakitis, and P. Jennings. 2019. Motion Sickness and Human Performance – Exploring the Impact of Driving
Simulator User Trials. In Advances in Human Aspects of Transportation. AHFE 2018. Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, vol
786, N. Stanton (Ed.). Springer, Cham. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-93885-1_40..

[61] C. Team. n.d.. Carla. CARLA Simulator. http://carla.org/.
[62] Jacques Terken, Pierre Levy, Chao Wang, Juffrizal Karjanto, Nidzamuddin Md Yusof, Felix Ros, and Sergej Zwaan. 2017. Gesture-based
and haptic interfaces for connected and autonomous driving. In Advances in Human Factors and System Interactions: Proceedings of
the AHFE 2016 International Conference on Human Factors and System Interactions, July 27-31, 2016, Walt Disney World®, Florida, USA.
Springer, 107–115.

[63] M. Tonnis, C. Lange, and G. Klinker. 2007. Visual Longitudinal and Lateral Driving Assistance in the Head-Up Display of Cars. In 2007

6th IEEE and ACM International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality. 91–94. doi:10.1109/ISMAR.2007.4538831..

[64] Cuong Tran, Karlin Bark, and Victor Ng-Thow-Hing. 2013. A left-turn driving aid using projected oncoming vehicle paths with
augmented reality. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications
(AutomotiveUI ’13). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 300–307. doi:10.1145/2516540.2516581..

[65] Imaginecreategrowdo Moreimaginewith Unity. [n. d.]. Unity Real-Time Development Platform | 3D, 2D, VR &amp; AR Engine. n.d.

https://unity.com/.

[66] A. R. A. Van der Horst. 1991. A time-based analysis of road user behaviour in normal and critical encounters. (1991).
[67] K. Vogel. 2003. A comparison of headway and time to collision as safety indicators. Accident analysis & prevention 35, 3 (2003), 427–433.
[68] Alla Vovk, Fridolin Wild, Will Guest, and Timo Kuula. 2018. Simulator Sickness in Augmented Reality Training Using the Microsoft
HoloLens. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Paper 209, 1–9. doi:10.1145/3173574.3173783..

[69] Chao Wang, Derck Chu, and Marieke Martens. 2023. Enhancing Perception of Risk Objects for Car Drivers Through Augmented
Reality Glasses. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular
Applications (Ingolstadt, Germany) (AutomotiveUI ’23 Adjunct). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 83–86.
doi:10.1145/3581961.3609870

[70] Chao Wang, Jing Gu, Jacques Terken, and Jun Hu. 2014. Driver-to-driver communication on the highway: What drivers want. In
Ambient Intelligence: European Conference, AmI 2014, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, November 11-13, 2014. Revised Selected Papers 5. Springer,
315–327.

[71] Chao Wang, Zhixiong Lu, Jacques Terken, and Jun Hu. 2017. HUD - AR: Enhancing Communication between Drivers by Affordable
Technology. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications Adjunct
(Oldenburg, Germany) (AutomotiveUI ’17). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 249–250. doi:10.1145/3131726.
3131875

[72] Chao Wang, Jacques Terken, Jun Hu, and Matthias Rauterberg. 2016. "Likes" and "Dislikes" on the Road: A Social Feedback System
for Improving Driving Behavior. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive
Vehicular Applications (Ann Arbor, MI, USA) (Automotive’UI 16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 43–50.
doi:10.1145/3003715.3005403

[73] James R. Ward, Gabriel Agamennoni, Stewart Worrall, Asher Bender, and Eduardo Nebot. 2015. Extending Time to Collision
for probabilistic reasoning in general traffic scenarios. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 51 (2015), 66–82.
doi:10.1016/j.trc.2014.11.002. ISSN 0968-090X.
[74] WayRay. n.d.. WayRay. (n.d.). https://wayray.com/.

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

ARive: Assisting Drivers with In-Car Augmented Reality for Risk Zone Detection 

•  20:27

A  Time Table of the User Study

Task
Study preparations
Briefing (Session 1)
Adjusting HoloLens and Simulation seat
Familiarization session
Break & Questions (Optional)
Drive (A)
Questionnaires
Briefing (Session 2)
Familiarization session
Break & Questions (Optional)
Drive (B)
Questionnaires
Briefing (Session 3)
Drive (A)
Questionnaires
Break & Questions (Optional)
Briefing (Session 4)
Drive (B)
Questionnaires
Break & Questions (Optional)
Briefing (Session 5)
Drive (A)
Questionnaires
Break & Questions (Optional)
Briefing (Session 6)
Drive (B)
Questionnaires
Interview
Appreciation
Total

Description

Duration

Informed Consent, Privacy statement, Demographics

5 minutes

Find comfortable fit
Simulator/interaction test drive

Baseline
UEQ / DALI
Design 1
Simulator/interaction test drive

Intervention
UEQ / DALI
Design 1
Intervention
UEQ / DALI

Design 2
Intervention
UEQ / DALI

Design 2
Intervention
UEQ / DALI

Baseline
UEQ / DALI
Open questions for extra insights

1 minutes
3 minutes
(5) minutes
5 minutes
2 minutes
1 minutes
3 minutes
(5) minutes
5 minutes
2 minutes
1 minutes
5 minutes
2 minutes
(5) minutes
1 minutes
5 minutes
2 minutes
(5) minutes
1 minutes
5 minutes
2 minutes
(5) minutes
1 minutes
5 minutes
2 minutes
5 minutes
1 minute
65 + (25)

Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., Vol. 9, No. 1, Article 20. Publication date: March 2025.

