ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 23 October 2019
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2019.00098

AR DriveSim: An Immersive Driving
Simulator for Augmented Reality
Head-Up Display Research

Joseph L. Gabbard 1*, Missie Smith 2, Kyle Tanous 1, Hyungil Kim 3 and Bryan Jonas 4*

1 Grado Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, United States, 2 Industrial and
Systems Engineering, Oakland University, Rochester, NY, United States, 3 Virginia Tech Transportation Institute, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA, United States, 4 Department of Mathematical Sciences, United States Military Academy, West Point, NY,
United States

Optical see-through automotive head-up displays (HUDs) are a form of augmented reality
(AR) that is quickly gaining penetration into the consumer market. Despite increasing
adoption, demand, and competition among manufacturers to deliver higher quality HUDs
with increased ﬁelds of view, little work has been done to understand how best to
design and assess AR HUD user interfaces, and how to quantify their effects on driver
behavior, performance, and ultimately safety. This paper reports on a novel, low-cost,
immersive driving simulator created using a myriad of custom hardware and software
technologies speciﬁcally to examine basic and applied research questions related to AR
HUDs usage when driving. We describe our experiences developing simulator hardware
and software and detail a user study that examines driver performance, visual attention,
and preferences using two AR navigation interfaces. Results suggest that conformal AR
graphics may not be inherently better than other HUD interfaces. We include lessons
learned from our simulator development experiences, results of the user study and
conclude with limitations and future work.

Keywords: augmented reality, head-up display, conformal graphics, driving simulator, human machine interface

INTRODUCTION

Edited by:
Mark Billinghurst,
University of South Australia, Australia

Reviewed by:
Gudrun Klinker,
Technical University of
Munich, Germany
Aitor Rovira,
University of Oxford, United Kingdom

*Correspondence:
Joseph L. Gabbard
jgabbard@vt.edu
Bryan Jonas
bryan.jonas@westpoint.edu

Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Virtual Environments,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Robotics and AI

Received: 25 June 2019
Accepted: 26 September 2019
Published: 23 October 2019

Citation:
Gabbard JL, Smith M, Tanous K,
Kim H and Jonas B (2019) AR
DriveSim: An Immersive Driving
Simulator for Augmented Reality
Head-Up Display Research.
Front. Robot. AI 6:98.
doi: 10.3389/frobt.2019.00098

While once the provenance of select academic and government labs, augmented reality (AR)
has now been applied in many contexts and delivered over a myriad of hardware technologies.
Successes have been documented regarding, for example, smartphone AR on the go (DüNser et al.,
2012; Shea et al., 2017), tablet based AR in classrooms (Bower et al., 2014), spatial AR in architecture
(Tonn et al., 2008), and head-worn AR in military and medical applications (Shen et al., 2013; Gans
et al., 2015). However, handheld AR notwithstanding, it is quite possible that the largest AR user
base will soon be automobile drivers using see-through automotive head-up displays (HUDs) to
view both screen-positioned 2D and conformal 3D AR content.

Indeed, recently we have seen renewed interest using HUDs in driving, due in part to the
commercialization of next-generation AR technologies. Automobile manufacturers are beginning
to ﬁeld AR HUD technologies (86 models in the US oﬀered HUDs in 2018), with marketing teams
pushing for more advanced AR HUD user interfaces. By 2020, HIS Automotive predicts there will
be 9.1 million HUDs sold.

Moreover, in the very near future, we expect increasingly large AR HUD ﬁeld of views, aﬀording
placement of information in many locations; from windshield-ﬁxed positions to conformal

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

1

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

Gabbard et al.

AR DriveSim

graphics that are perceptually attached to real-world referents. In
the same timeframe, we expect an increase in semi-autonomous
vehicles where drivers must still attend to both the road scene
and system information (likely provided via AR HUDs), creating
the perfect storm for potentially dangerous and distracting AR
HUD interfaces.

While

provide

next-generation AR HUDs will

a
fundamentally new driving experience, we currently do not
know how to eﬀectively design and evaluate user interfaces (UIs)
in this space. With new AR HUDs capable of rendering images
over large areas at varying depths, the visual and cognitive
separation between graphical and real-world visual stimuli will
be increasingly more diﬃcult to quantify. As we move toward
widespread use of next-gen AR HUDs in transportation, we
need to better understand how to manage UI designs that are not
simply atop the environment, but instead are an integrated part of
the environment.

Without new research capabilities, HUD UI researchers and
practitioners are left to base HUD UI design and assessment
on current (and dated) understanding of traditional in-vehicle
information systems. Common in-vehicle display assessment
methods were developed based on data collected in vehicles in the
early 2000s (Administration NHTS, 2013), and recent research
suggests these assessment methods have limited applicability
to AR HUDs (Smith et al., 2016). Thus, as we start ﬁelding,
and designing for, new AR HUD displays, we must also
develop our understanding of AR HUD eﬀects on visual
attention and driver performance. In a design space that aﬀords
fundamentally diﬀerent user experiences, we must pose the
question: “How do AR HUD user interfaces that are necessarily
visually integrated into a highly dynamic primary task space aﬀect
driver performance?” Driving simulators provide a method of
rapidly iterating on AR HUD design in realistic driving scenarios
without the danger or cost of on-road testing.

To this end, this paper reports our experiences creating
a relatively low-cost, full-scale driving simulator designed to
examine AR HUD usage eﬀect on driver performance and
behavior. The remainder of the paper describes the hardware
and software technical implementation in detail, followed by a
user study to demonstrate the utility of the driving simulator
and concludes by presenting lessons learned from our multi-year
endeavor creating and testing an AR HUD driving simulator.

RELATED WORK

To explore opportunities of driving simulation for AR user
interface design and evaluation, we brieﬂy examine human-
subject studies that incorporated a various range of (1) simulator
hardware, (2) optical see-through AR displays, and (3) software
to realize conformal graphics for driver-vehicle interfaces. For
more information about driving simulation in general (e.g.,
current state-of-art technology, applications, capabilities, and
limitations), see a comprehensive handbook (Fisher et al., 2011).
Regarding ﬁdelity of driving simulation (i.e., visual stimuli,
vehicle control, and motion), a wide range of driving simulator
hardware has been used in empirical studies on AR applications

depending upon the research questions addressed. The lowest
ﬁdelity settings are often a combination of desktop computers,
monitors and game controllers (Neurauter, 2005; Kim and Dey,
2009; Weinberg et al., 2011; Charissis et al., 2013; Kim et al.,
2013; Tran et al., 2013; Politis et al., 2014; Sharﬁ and Shinar,
2014; Tippey et al., 2014). For example, Sharﬁ and Shinar (2014)
prototyped an AR visibility enhancement system for nighttime
driving that highlights lane markers using a desktop computer,
DEXXA game controllers, and a 126 × 60 cm monitor and
found that augmented road edges have positive eﬀects on drivers’
conﬁdence and workload while reducing their ability to detect
unexpected obstacles. Other researchers have used medium
ﬁdelity driving simulators that typically consist of a ﬁxed-based
real car cab with wall projection screens (Tonnis and Klinker,
2006; Caird et al., 2008; Plavšic et al., 2009; Olaverri-Monreal
et al., 2012; Saﬀarian et al., 2013; Schall et al., 2013; Wai-Tat et al.,
2013; Bolton et al., 2015). Fu et al. conducted a user study in a
driving simulator with a GM Saturn real-car cab on a ﬁxed base
(Wai-Tat et al., 2013). The user study showed that the proposed
AR forward collision warning improved driving performance
but induced risky driving behavior especially among young
drivers. A few user studies have been conducted in a high-ﬁdelity
driving simulator with motion-based real car cabs with wide
ﬁeld of view projection screens, in-vehicle displays for mirrors
and center console displays (Medenica et al., 2011; Lorenz
et al., 2014). For example, Medenica et al. (2011) evaluated
the usability of three navigation aids in a high-ﬁdelity real-
car cab atop a motion-base which is able to simulate vehicle
motion for braking and accelerating. The user study showed
beneﬁts of a conformal AR navigation aid showing a virtual
route hovering above the road against traditional map-view
or street view navigation aids presented on a center console
display. Lastly, SILAB (WIVW, 2019), a commercially available
driving simulator, supports a ﬂexible, wide range of simulation
ﬁdelity from desktop systems with gaming control inputs to
multi-channel projected scenes with real vehicles placed on
motion platforms. Similar to our work presented herein, SILAB
supports physiological measurement, video capture of driver
and passengers from arbitrary angles, eye tracking, real-time
connection protocols (such as TCP/IP, UDP, and CAN bus),
and support for secondary task integration. From materials
available online, it is not clear if separate AR HUD hardware has
been successfully integrated into SILAB. However, it is certainly
plausible that the infrastructure as described would support such
an endeavor.

For AR displays, most researchers have simulated AR HUDs
by presenting AR graphics directly within driving scene (with
no physical AR display; Caird et al., 2008; Kim and Dey, 2009;
Plavšic et al., 2009; Charissis and Papanastasiou, 2010; Medenica
et al., 2011; Dijksterhuis et al., 2012; Olaverri-Monreal et al., 2012;
Kim et al., 2013, 2016; Saﬀarian et al., 2013; Schall et al., 2013;
Wai-Tat et al., 2013; Lorenz et al., 2014; Politis et al., 2014; Sharﬁ
and Shinar, 2014), while some installed in-house prototypes
(Tonnis and Klinker, 2006; Langlois, 2013; Tran et al., 2013),
aftermarket c, or head-worn displays inside driving simulators
(Sawyer et al., 2014; Tippey et al., 2017). Generally speaking, from
our experience, integrating graphics directly into the driving

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

2

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

Gabbard et al.

AR DriveSim

scene (via computer graphics or video) does not aﬀord the same
accommodative and/or cognitive switching (Gabbard et al., 2019)
that a separate AR display does; an important component for
research that wishes to faithfully examine the eﬀects of AR HUDs
on driver’s visual attention. Moreover, home-made AR HUDs
(e.g., using tablets and semi-transparent combiners) may suﬀer
from ghosting and other visual artifact that can impact user study
results unless extreme care is put into its construction.

Kim et al. (2013) simulated an aftermarket HUD by presenting
a virtual hardware form factor of the HUD (24 × 8◦ ﬁeld of view)
with semi-transparent AR forward collision warning and blind
spot warning via the virtual display. Schall et al. (2013) simulated
a full windshield HUD for AR collision warning by directly
highlighting road hazards with virtual boxes integrated into the
driving scene. Tonnis and Klinker (2006) prototyped an in-house
HUDs by using a combiner and a small projection screen for
AR graphics separate from a large wall projection screen for
driving scene. Similarly, Lauber and Butz (2013) simulated a
head-up display using an LCD display and combiner mirror with
70% transparency, to compare screen-ﬁxed presentation of speed,
speed limit, collision warning, and basic navigation information
to head-worn AR presentation via a Vuzix StarTM 1200 HM.
Pfannmueller et al. (2015) used a mock-up of a contact analog
head-up display (cHUD) to present AR graphics atop a video
projection of driving scenes to explore various AR navigation
display concepts. While details are lacking, the cHUD appears
similar to others that use a tablet or monitor reﬂected via semi-
transparent combiner (as opposed to commercial head-up or
head-worn AR display). While this system provides a quick
method for assessing AR HMI design concepts, it does not
support manual driving, nor does it appear to easily support
investigation of conformal AR graphics.

A nice on-road study by Wiesner et al. (2017) uses a
commercial prototype head-up display in a real vehicle to
understand driver performance with AR interface designs
in real driving environments. The work integrated a high-
precision Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) and an
advanced driver-assistance systems (ADAS) horizon system to
study the eﬀectiveness of “AR-like” visualizations of imminent
intersections, highway exits and roundabouts. The authors do not
conformally integrate AR graphics into the scene in part because
the graphics represent a future event; thus tight visual integration
is not explicitly warranted. The authors employ eye tracking and
results regarding the eﬀect of AR on drivers’ glance behavior are
similar to our results presented herein: namely that an AR HUD-
based presentation helps drivers keep their eyes in the direction of
road longer, with shorter glances toward the instrument cluster,
and slightly longer mean glances toward the HUD (as compared
to a head-down display).

Conformal graphics in driving simulators have been realized
mostly by direct integration of AR graphics into computer-
generated driving scene without separate displays (Caird et al.,
2008; Kim and Dey, 2009; Plavšic et al., 2009; Charissis and
Papanastasiou, 2010; Medenica et al., 2011; Kim et al., 2013;
Schall et al., 2013; Wai-Tat et al., 2013; Lorenz et al., 2014;
Politis et al., 2014; Sharﬁ and Shinar, 2014). The few instances
found in literature that present conformal AR graphics use

Wizard of Oz (Bolton et al., 2015), computer-vision-based object
detection (Wu et al., 2009), and communication between driving
simulation software and AR application (Tran et al., 2013).
Lorenz et al. (2014) prototyped AR warnings for restricted
lanes due to emergency situations by presenting green safe
path or red dangerous path by integrating conformal graphics
into the driving scene using the same rendering pipeline as
the driving environment. Bolton et al. (2015) presented drivers
with a seemingly autonomous driving scenario including pre-
recorded navigation arrows visible through an optical see-
through HUD which correspond with a speciﬁc driving scenario
that were manually-triggered by researchers. Wu et al. (2009)
played driving footage in front of a driving simulator and
overlaid AR bounding boxes through the windshield to highlight
detected road signs by computer-vision technology. Finally, Tran
et al. developed a capability of presenting real-time conformal
graphics via communication with driving simulation software
that transmitted information about road geometry, other road
actors and traﬃc signals. They presented AR graphics to visualize
predicted path of oncoming traﬃc for left turn aid. However,
details about the system conﬁguration and software architecture
were not reported (Tran et al., 2013).

Conducting AR studies with conformal AR graphics on-road
is very diﬃcult due to the diﬃculty in tracking the driver’s
position and orientation. At ﬁrst thought, this may seem like an
easy proposition given today’s real-time kinematics-enabled GPS,
accelerometers, vision-based, and LIDAR sensing capabilities.
However, the small vibrations and undulations caused by the
road surface, tires, and vehicle suspension actually makes tightly
registering conformal graphics to the driving scene diﬃcult.
Exacerbating the problem is the fact that any slight variations
in graphics’ movements (relative to the real-world referents) are
easily detected by the human visual system eﬀectively rendering
the potential beneﬁts of conformal graphics disconcerting,
distracting or confusing. Until such ability to “lock” conformal
AR graphics into the near and far driving scene is established,
the use of driving simulators designed speciﬁcally to study the
eﬀects of AR graphics on driver performance and behavior,
such as our system presented herein, is critically needed. It
should be noted that while these technical tracking capabilities
advance, we can still examine, both in simulation and on-
road, AR graphic designs that are more forgiving of tracking
and pose estimation errors. For example, Wiesner and Klinker
(2017) present an AR visualization for navigation which aimed
to overcome errors in current GPS turn by relying solely on
distance to next turn. Interestingly, their results suggest that
precision of a conformal graphic may not be the sole determinant
of eﬀectiveness, since their “sails” AR design that required lower
precision via conventional GNSS system was preferred over a
high-precisions conformal arrow design.

In sum, when reviewing the literature, it is clear that several
researchers have and continue to engage in meaningful AR HUD
research using a myriad of hardware, software, and experimental
methodologies. From our review, and to the best of our
knowledge, our AR DriveSim is unique in that it provides several
synergistic capabilities including: fully immersive vehicle cab
and projection system, physiological capture, and measurement

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

3

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

Gabbard et al.

AR DriveSim

(e.g., of eye and driver behavior), custom electronics for
communications and control of vehicle, synchronization of data
streams associated with vehicle dynamics, AR interfaces and
driver/passengers, autonomous driving, force-feedback to the
steering wheel, integrated after-market head-up display, and the
ability to render full color, animated, conformal AR graphics.

DRIVING SIMULATOR FOR AR INTERFACE
RESEARCH

In this section, we report the details of a multi-year eﬀort to build
an AR driving simulator (hereafter referred to as AR DriveSim).
From the onset, we established several guiding principles. (1)
Embed an actual vehicle cab into a wide ﬁeld of view 3D
projection space (Figure 1). That is, we wished to create a high
degree of immersion as described by Witmer and Singer, that is
a “psychological state characterized by perceiving oneself to be
enveloped by, included in, and interacting with an environment
that provides a continuous stream of stimuli and experiences,”
and well as a high degree of place illusion (Witmer and Singer,
1998; Skarbez et al., 2017). (2) Employ an actual HUD to
display AR (and other) graphics, and not simply project or
integrate “simulated AR graphics” into the driving scene. (3)
Embrace ﬂexibility in the testbed design to aﬀord many diﬀerent
types of human-subjects studies with a focus on AR HUD
usage. (4) Empower researchers to collect a suite of dependent
measures to characterize human performance and behavior
including driver performance metrics, visual attention, and gaze
patterns, objective measures of mental workload, and video-
based measures of head, hand and feet movements. The following
sections describe key components of our AR DriveSim in hopes
that these contributions help others develop similar capabilities.

AR DriveSim Hardware
At its core, the AR DriveSim is a projection-based, monoscopic
virtual environment, whereby users “locomote” the environment
as a driver of an automobile. In our system, the VR content is
provided via MiniSim, a 3D driving simulator software developed
at the University of Iowa’s National Advanced Driving Simulator
research center. MiniSim 2.2 executes on a desktop computer
with an Intel Core i7 processing running @ 3.70 GHz, with
64 gigabytes of DDR4 RAM running Windows 10. The driving
scene is rendered by a PNY NVIDIA Quadro P4000 graphics
card and projected via DisplayPort @ 1,920 × 1,200 using
three (warped and blended) Epson Powerlite Pro G6900WU NL
projectors. In this hardware conﬁguration, MiniSim provides
smooth rendering of up to about 1 million triangles at 60 frames
per second. We route these three main forward views through
Tripp Lite hardware to mirror the viewports onto three desktop
monitors (Figure 2B) to provide an experimenter’s view and
control station.

For the projection surface, we mounted a professional grade
lace-and-grommet screen by Draper that is 93′′ high by 360′′
long, onto a custom U-shaped, curved frame (73′′ inch radius).
The projection screen uses a Contrast Gray XH800E smooth
gray viewing surface that provides enhanced color contrast and

FIGURE 1 | A bird’s eye view of the Mini Cooper half cab with participant and
experimenter. While the work presented herein focuses on CG-based driving
capabilities, the testbed also supports alternative forms of driving studies (e.g.,
video-based).

black levels, and is especially useful for our application that uses
three projectors with high lumen output. The frame consists of
1½ inch rolled aluminum tubing at both the top and bottom,
with 1 × 1 square aluminum tubing structural uprights spaced
approximately every 2′.

The centerpiece of our driving simulator is the front half of
a 2014 Mini Cooper automobile. The vehicle was donated from
a major car insurance company that kindly removed the engine
and transmission prior to delivery. Once delivered, we tested
the electrical components and then completely disassembled the
vehicle, including all trim, seats, airbags, dash components, and
more until just the frame remained. The back half of the cab
was removed and discarded, and the top half of the remaining
cab was temporarily removed. The two cab halves were relocated
into a lab, where the back-end of the bottom half was mounted
on a frame with casters (the front-end of bottom half supported
by original tires). The top half was the reattached and we
then reassembled all the previously removed components (from
supporting sub-structures to ﬁnished trim pieces) and tested the
reassembled vehicle electrical systems.

We then incorporated additional displays to support side view
mirrors, rear view mirrors, digital instrument panel, and ﬂexible
center-stack displays. Speciﬁcally, we added three Lilliput 7-inch
USB LCD video monitors (800 × 480) connected via powered
USB hubs and DisplayLink software to serve as side view mirrors

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

4

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

Gabbard et al.

AR DriveSim

FIGURE 2 | The logical arrangements of 7 AR DriveSim screens with resolution and physical connections noted (A); experimenter’s control station (B), and an
annotated view from inside the Mini Cooper cab (C). Note that the AR HUD and Center Stack displays are connected to a separate computer dedicated to
UI presentation.

and customizable digital instrument panel (Figure 2). We placed
an ASUS PB328Q 32′′ widescreen LCD monitor behind the cab
(and rendered content accordingly) to aﬀord natural use of the
optical rear-view mirror. The rear-view monitor is connected
via DisplayPort at 1,280 × 720 to optimize performance in the
three main forward projected views. To increase place illusion,
we added a consumer grade subwoofer and speakers in the engine
compartment to render real-time audio such as engine noise.
to
Lastly, we added a suite of additional equipment
assist in capturing participant behavior. A set of three Axis
P1204 3.7 mm mini HD covert pinhole network cameras were
placed (1) on the rear-view mirror (facing the participants
face), (2) in the driver footwell (capturing foot behavior
such as hovering over brake pedal), and (3) on the center
of
the cab ceiling pointing at participants’ hands on the
steering wheel. The cameras are connected to the NOLDUS
Observational Suite, which aﬀords synchronized video across
the three IP cameras as well as with a direct digital video
feed of the driving scene from the drivsim computer. The
AR DriveSim also contains both SMI ETG 60 Hz and Tobii
Pro Glasses 2 100 Hz wireless eye tracking glasses with
forward looking scene camera that allows us to carefully assess
drivers’ gaze allocation; an especially critical capability for
understanding how AR HUD interface designs aﬀect drivers’
visual attention. We capture physiological measures of driver
workload using a Mio LINK heart rate monitor to capture
heart rate variability (Meshkati, 1988), and RedScientiﬁc’s
Detection Response Task to provide an objective measure

of residual attentional capacity using the dual-task paradigm
(Sala et al., 1995).

Simulator Controls and Interface System
While there are many ways to connect physical cab controls
to simulation software, we chose to decode the Mini Cooper’s
exiting Controller Area Network (CAN) bus so that we could
leverage existing high-speed control data streams. A CAN
bus is a serial data communication protocol developed by
the BOSCH Corporation to mitigate the challenges associated
with data transfer and exchange among a vehicle’s controllers,
sensors, instruments, and other electrical components (Ran et al.,
2010). By leveraging bi-directional CAN bus communication,
it is possible to, for example, read steering wheel position,
pedal positions, and button presses, and also manipulate the
speedometer, tachometer and other elements from simulation
in real-time. While there are many online resources describing
the principles of the CAN bus architecture and wide array of
application areas, manufacturer-speciﬁc CAN bus IDs are much
more diﬃcult to locate as they are generally not released to
the public. Since we were unable to ﬁnd CAN bus IDs for a
2014 Mini Cooper, we used a combination of oﬀ-the-shelf on-
board diagnostics scanning tools, an Arduino CAN bus Shield,
an oscilloscope and professional grade automotive diagnostic
computers to reverse engineer the set of CAN bus IDs, variable
length payloads, and values for critical Mini Cooper functions.

To facilitate communication between the Mini Cooper and
MiniSim software, we integrated a single board computer

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

5

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

Gabbard et al.

AR DriveSim

FIGURE 3 | The major computing components of our AR DriveSim communicate via UDP (yellow). A set of off-the-shelf and custom microcontrollers (brown) pass
driving control inputs read from CAN bus (green) and other sensors to the AR DriveSim computer (orange). A control board (brown) further manages a DC motor to
provide force feedback to the steering wheel. A separate computer (blue) renders 3D graphics on an AR HUD by synchronizing its virtual camera position in real-time
with the AR DriveSim computer. A set of experimenter controls (black) assist in coordinating experiments.

(SBC), microcontroller and custom control board to collect
and send CAN bus messages, analog voltages from several
custom-installed linear potentiometers, and a few OEM sensors
(Figure 3).

The microcontroller is used to manage the low-complexity,
highly-repetitive tasks such as receiving CAN bus messages and
reading the analog voltages from the various sensors. We used a
Teensy 3.5 because of the built-in CAN bus receiver function, a
high number of digital and analog general-purpose input/output,
and the ﬂexibility of several protocols for communicating with
other systems. The more complex functions of the interface
system are managed by a Linux-based SBC that receives
parameters from the microcontroller, formats and scales them
as needed, and ﬁnally composes and sends the data as UDP
packets across wired Ethernet to the MiniSim computer. We
initially utilized an Arduino Yún as the SBC but following a serial
communications issue, we switched to an Intel Galileo Gen2.

The Teensy uses the CAN bus interface to access control
data such as steering wheel position data, button presses, etc.
We installed three linear potentiometers to measure the position
of the accelerator pedal, brake pedal, and automatic gearshift
position. Each of these parameters is linearly scaled to single byte-
sized values and transferred over a serial connection between
the Teensy and the Galileo. Upon starting, a python control
script stored on the Galileo begins a handshake exchange with
the Teensy to establish common timing for the communication
scheme. Once communication is started between the two
devices, the SBC determines the timing of the transmissions by

transmitting a single byte to the Teensy. In response, the Teensy
transmits all the steering and position values it has received from
the sensors and CAN bus via a two-wire serial connection at
115,200 bps. Once received, the Galileo linearly rescales these
values per the MiniSim speciﬁcations and packages them into a
UDP packet. Testing indicates that this custom interface system
reliably transmits 100 packets per second. Although we have not
formally measured the end-to-end latency, we expect it to be
minimal given (1) MiniSim parses incoming UDP data at 60 Hz,
and (2) our own empirical observation.

The Teensy communicates with the Cooper’s CAN bus using
the FlexCAN library (Pimentel and Fonseca, 2004) and a handler
that extracts the required information at the time of reception
of each CAN bus frame. Once we knew the frame ID of the
required parameters and of the structure of these frames, it
was very easy to harvest the needed information as it came
across the bus. The linear potentiometers used to measure the
position of the accelerator and brake pedals are connected to
the pedals via plastic-sheathed control cables (we could not
decode pedal position in CANBUS). The potentiometers are
supplied with 3.3 V and are read at the Teensy’s standard 13-
bit resolution. The OEM spring-return of the pedals beneﬁts
our system by also returning the potentiometers to their “zero”
position. As the actual range of mechanical movement of the
pedals and potentiometers can be aﬀected by friction and other
factors; our analog reading routine updates the minimum and
maximum read value for both pedals and utilizes these values
to map the current reading to a value between 0 and 255 for

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

6

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

Gabbard et al.

AR DriveSim

transmission to the Galileo. Similar to pedal setup, a plastic-
sheathed control cable connects the automatic gearshift to the
linear potentiometer which is also supplied with 3.3 V. We used
pre-measured values of the voltages associated with the various
gears on the automatic transmission to determine the position
transmission in the analog reading routine.

To increase the place illusion aﬀorded by the driving simulator
experience, we repurposed the electric power steering feature of
the Mini Cooper to provide force feedback as well as return-to-
center to the steering wheel as is experienced in a normal vehicle.
To support these sensorimotor contingencies, we designed a
opto-isolated MOSFET H-bridge circuit to allow a brushed DC
motor that is coupled to the steering shaft to move the steering
wheel as desired. By changing the pulse-width modulation duty
cycle, we are able to change the force feedback intensity to vary
with the simulated vehicle speed. This H-bridge circuit was built
on a custom-designed and printed circuit board that we term
the “control board.” The control board also contains the Teensy,
power circuitry, CAN bus connection header, as well as the
connections for the linear potentiometers and any future sensors
and electronics.

Launching and stopping the python script on the Galileo
is accomplished from a python-based graphical user interface
(GUI) accessible on the MiniSim computer that utilizes a secure
shell to issue commands to the Galileo. The control processes
are run in the background of the Galileo to provide robustness
in the event of a timeout of the secure shell session or other
issue. By providing a simple GUI to the communication layer,
all researchers regardless of computing background can easily
launch and monitor communications between the Mini Cooper,
its microcontrollers and simulation software.

We also added a Logitech G27 game-based racing wheel
and pedals to not only assist in driving scenario development
and testing, but more importantly, to allow for Wizard of
Oz autonomous driving studies (e.g., how AR HUDs can
assist handover between manual and autonomous driving).
The aforementioned Python GUI allows researchers to switch
between Mini Cooper controls
(i.e., participant manually
driving) and game controller (e.g., experimenter driving as an
autonomous agent).

AR Head-Up Display Implementation
AR HUD Hardware
To support our research on the eﬀects of AR interfaces on driver
performance and behavior, we integrated a Pioneer Carrozzeria
Cyber Navi Head-up display. The Cyber Navi is an optical see-
through, ﬁxed focal length (∼3 m) laser-based display designed
to be mounted on the interior roof in place of a sun visor.
We mounted the HUD on a rail along the interior roof of the
Mini Cooper so that it can be positioned at varying distances
(8–24 inches) from the driver’s eyepoint. According to the
manufacturer, the Cyber Navi supports a ∼17◦ horizontal ﬁeld
of view, which is consistent with our experiences calibrating the
HUD image to the MiniSim driving scene.

created color-rendering issues in our simulation environment; at
low light levels (i.e., dark simulator room) the HUD not only
dims but also has a strong color bias toward green. That is, white
graphics appear green at low lighting levels. To remedy this, we
mounted a single LED on a potentiometer directly in front the
HUD light sensor. When the LED is lit, the HUD adjusts by
creating brighter images resulting in good color rendering. We
then applied 20% visible light transmission tinting to the lens to
better match the luminance of the HUD graphics to the projected
driving scene.

AR HUD Software
Generally speaking, the HUD can render a VGA video source
from any VGA-compatible computer and software. This is
convenient, as we have successfully conducted user studies
using PowerPoint to render 2D screen-ﬁxed text and symbols
to assess driver distraction and visual attention with varying
HUD positions and UI complexity (Smith et al., 2016, 2017). As
shown in Figure 3 (in blue), our simulator contains an Arduino
microcontroller and CAN-Shield that parses steering wheel
button presses from the CAN bus and routes them to the AR
HUD computer by emulating a USB connected keyboard. The
Mini Coopers’ steering wheel buttons are conveniently arranged
to aﬀord a left and right directional-pad (plus two additional
buttons located on the right side of steering wheel). In this
arrangement, researchers can quickly design experiments that
present a series of visual stimuli and employ up to 10 diﬀerent
button presses to explore HUD interface issues such as menu
navigation, manual conformation of UI selections, self-paced
psychophysical studies, and more.

However, conformal AR HUD graphics require a more
complicated software platform consisting of data traﬃc control,
data transformation, and scene graph components. In our
current system, we implement these components as MiniSim’s
UDP route table, a middleware Python script, and an
X3D/JavaScript scene graph, respectively.

Data passes between components as UDP packets containing
information as deﬁned by MiniSim’s route table–a customizable
construct that allows us to specify which MiniSim variable are
packaged and broadcast over the network at 60 Hz (as deﬁned
by the output rate of MiniSim). In order to present AR graphics,
we transmit MiniSim’s simulated vehicle position and orientation
within the scene. This data is then used to continuously update
the position and orientation of the X3D camera.

Depending on the nature of the data output by the traﬃc
controller, it may need to be transformed to meet the speciﬁcation
of the scene graph component. To meet X3D’s pose speciﬁcations,
own-vehicle coordinates in MiniSim must be negated along
the z-axis. MiniSim’s yaw, pitch, and roll values are then
used to generate a single rotation vector and magnitude. This
transformed data is used to match the pose of X3D’s viewpoint to
that of the driver within the simulation. This means presentation
of conformal AR HUD graphics is deﬁned solely by X3D’s
viewpoint pose relative to MiniSim’s scene.

As a laser-based display, the Cyber Navi can produce bright
images at 12,000 cd/m2 and has an ambient light sensor and
automatic dimming capability. The automatic dimming however

Timing of AR HUD graphics’ behavior is done through the
use of MiniSim’s road pad trigger events which, when driven over
by participants, generate event speciﬁc network data traﬃc. For

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

7

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

Gabbard et al.

AR DriveSim

example, in the user study presented below, road pad triggers
create data packets that inform the AR HUD software that
the driver has encountered an augmented driving segment, and
consequently begin rendering the desired AR HUD graphics. The
data selected to inform the behavior of conformal graphics is
adaptable as a callback mechanism to launch procedures deﬁned
in the AR HUD scene graph component. The MiniSim route
table can also be conﬁgured to send position and orientation
data on the nearest 20 dynamic scene objects (e.g., other vehicles,
pedestrians, etc.). Such information can also be used to render
real-time conformal graphics such visual pedestrian alerts and
labels for nearby traﬃc.

For reference, it should be noted that for the study presented
below, we were able to render conformal AR HUD graphics
using X3D on a fairly small computer: Intel i5 2,400 s @ 2.5
ghz, 4 gigs ram, Ubuntu 14.04 LTS, running CPU graphics.
More complicated AR HUD imagery, either in presentation
or behavior, would be well-suited for newer computing and
graphics hardware.

Calibrating the AR HUD
Because the physical HUD position may need to change to
accommodate diﬀerent driver height and seat positions, it is
important that a calibration procedure be performed to ensure
accurate perceptual registration of conformal graphics to the
driving scene. To accomplish this, participants ﬁrst sit in the
driver’s seat and position the seat to a comfortable position. We
have participants perform a coarse positioning of the AR HUD
combiner (which is hinged along the top edge) such that top and
bottom edges of the combiner align with a prepared calibration
image projected onto the curved screen. This ensures that the AR
HUD is correctly positioned vertically in the scene so that it, for
example, covers the roadway.

Next, participants check to ensure that conformal AR graphics
perceptually appear in the correct location. For this step, we
created a simple highway scenario containing a visible horizon
and four vehicles parked at known positions along either side of
the highway. The AR HUD software draws boxes around each car
as deﬁned by a shared absolute coordinate system. Additionally,
the software draws lines correlating to the highway’s lane
markings to the point of convergence as viewed in simulation
(Figure 4). By using incremental keyboard controls deﬁned in
the AR HUD software to manipulate ﬁeld of view, aspect ratio,
viewpoint pitch, and viewpoint position, we are able to quickly
align these graphics with respect to their simulation counterparts.
The calibration routine implicitly leverages each participant’s
tendency to align augmented and simulation graphics using their
dominant eye, ensuring perceptually accurate augmentations of
the driving scene.

AR HUD USER STUDY

Purpose
After building and reﬁning all driving simulator components,
we performed a user study to demonstrate the testbed’s research
capability. We were especially interested in comparing traditional
2D HUD style graphics to conformal AR graphics since a

majority of AR work aims to study the eﬀect of conformal
graphics on driver/operator performance.

Automotive manufacturers are already implementing 2D
screen-ﬁxed AR HUD graphics (i.e., graphics are displayed
in a ﬁxed position on the HUD screen) in vehicles on the
road today. These screen-ﬁxed images are used to display a
variety of information,
including navigation directions. One
area garnering much interest with automotive manufacturers
is the potential for georeferenced, world-relative graphics that
might be “ﬁxed” in a single location in the world, or dynamic,
moving relative to the world, but appearing as part of the world.
One of the most common use-cases for these world-relative
graphics is navigation, as cues within the world can provide
drivers with information to help them navigate throughout
complex environments. These two types of graphic use the
same technology to convey similar information (where to go)
in very diﬀerent ways. For this reason, our purpose with
this study was to compare visual attention, driving behaviors,
and experience when using two diﬀerent types of AR HUD
navigational graphics: screen-relative and world-relative, both
ﬁxed in location.

Experimental Design
We compared two diﬀerent navigation display conditions
(Figure 5): a conformal arrow (Conformal) and a screen-ﬁxed
arrow (Screen-ﬁxed). Conformal arrow was rendered on the
HUD and appeared as if it was on the road and blue in
color. As participants approached the turn, they “drove over”
the arrow as if it was part of the road. Screen-ﬁxed displayed
turn directions using a 2D arrow rendered on the HUD,
oriented left or right as appropriate, and inspired by current
navigation systems. The vertical portion of the Screen-ﬁxed
arrow ﬁlled as participants approached the turn indicating
the distance-to-turn.

Methods
After study approval from Virginia Tech’s Institutional Review
Board, we recruited participants using ﬂyers posted on
campus, shared with faculty, and email
listserv postings. In
addition, several participants asked permission to share their
experience participating with other friends in the area, and
some people chose to participate based on these referrals.
Interested individuals contacted the researchers via email to
ask any questions regarding the study and to schedule the
in the lab,
data collection session,
participants consented to participate and entered the driving
simulator where they were ﬁtted with eye tracking glasses and
adjusted the seat to their comfort. They then performed a
familiarization drive to get comfortable with driving simulator
setting and vehicle dynamics. We instructed them to drive
30 mph and obey all traﬃc rules and norms including traﬃc
signals. If they exceeded the speed limit by more than 10%, an
audible siren sound was presented indicating that they needed
to slow down. The familiarization drive lasted for a minimum
of 5 min, until
they were comfortable
with driving the simulator vehicle and the researchers also
conﬁrmed that they were able to maintain vehicle control

if desired. Upon arrival

they indicated that

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

8

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

Gabbard et al.

AR DriveSim

FIGURE 4 | A participant’s view as they calibrate the AR HUD 3D graphics by viewing carefully placed 3D shapes and perspective lines overlaid onto a static road
scene with known geometry.

FIGURE 5 | The user study examined two HUD display conditions: a conformal arrow integrated into road scene (top), and, a screen-ﬁxed arrow which ﬁlled as
drivers approached turns (bottom). For each, the initial state of the graphic appeared at 392 feet from the interaction (left panels), and disappeared after participants
traversed intersections (right panels).

while stopping, starting, turning, and driving straight. After
the familiarization drive, we calibrated the HUD vertically
and horizontally.

turns:

four right

Participants experienced the navigation display conditions
in a series of drives. Each drive took place in a large
city and included eight
turns and four
left turns, all of which were cued by the navigation system
and lasted between 6 and 12 min. Diﬀerences in duration
were largely due to individual diﬀerences and randomized
traﬃc patterns. In addition, participants were instructed to
attend to oncoming traﬃc and cross traﬃc while turning
and driving throughout
the turns (two
left, two right) had cross traﬃc consisting of a platoon of
eight vehicles.

the city. Half of

Throughout the drive, glance behavior and gaze direction
was captured via SensoMotoric Instruments (SMI) eye tracking
glasses; which recorded audio, forward facing view, and gaze
location for each participant. After data collection, we used
SMI BeGaze 3.6.40 analysis software to analyze participants’
ﬁxation allocation using manually deﬁned areas of interest.
We used the Noldus Observation Suite to record video of the
forward-looking road scene independent of participants’ gaze
direction. This video footage was used to identify participants’
risk-taking behaviors. After each drive, participants completed
a short series of questionnaires which included workload and
usability measures.

We collected complete data for 22 participants, all of whom
had a US driver’s license for longer than 1 year (mean 4.6

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

9

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

Gabbard et al.

AR DriveSim

FIGURE 6 | Participants rated the NASA-TLX sub-scores on a scale of 0 (low demand) to 100 (high demand). The average of the sub-scores comprised the Raw
TLX score.

years, maximum: 19 years, minimum: 2 years). Thirteen males
(mean age 20.3 years) and nine females (mean age 20.4 years)
participated. On average, participants drove 7,918 miles per year.

Analysis and Results
We conducted a mixed eﬀects linear model which allowed us
to account for individual participant diﬀerences as a random
eﬀect as seen in de Bruin et al. (2008). We analyzed a series of
dependent measures of workload and usability, glance behavior,
driving behavior, and risk taking. For each dependent measure,
we ﬁt our model in JMP Pro 12 accounting for the eﬀect of the
independent measures (display type, order, participant gender,
turn direction, presence of traﬃc) and second-order interactions
of these eﬀects. As this was an exploratory study, the scope of this
paper only includes detailed discussion regarding the individual
inﬂuence of display type on dependent measures.

Workload and Usability Measures
Participants self-reported workload using NASA-TLX (Hart and
Staveland, 1988) after each drive. There was a signiﬁcant eﬀect
of navigation display on mental demand, eﬀort, and overall Raw
TLX score (the average of all sub scores; see Figure 6, Table 1).
The Screen-ﬁxed display resulted in lower mental demand, eﬀort,
and overall workload than the Conformal display.

After exposure to each condition, we also collected self-
reported data for ﬁve usability measures: distraction, display
impact on driving, ease of navigation, trust, and ease of viewing
(Figure 7, Table 1). There was a signiﬁcant eﬀect of display
condition on participants’ reported ease of navigation, viewing,
trust, and driving impact (Table 1). Post hoc testing showed that
the screen-ﬁxed display resulted in better usability scores for all
signiﬁcant diﬀerences.

Glance Behavior
We categorized areas of interest (AOIs) for participants’ glance
location and analyzed the AOIs two ways. The ﬁrst analysis
included two AOIs: on- and oﬀ-HUD. The purpose of this
distinction is to understand how much drivers limit their gaze
to looking only through the HUD as opposed to scanning
around the scene. The second AOI coding scheme allowed
us to better understand participants’ scan patterns to driving-
relevant areas (Figure 8). Some researchers have proposed more
reﬁned coding metrics that include locations in the roadway
where hazards are likely to occur in addition to “display” and
“road” glances (Seppelt et al., 2017). However, incorporating
world-relative graphics into drivers’ roadway scene can cause
conformal HUD graphics to necessarily overlap with the road,
therefore we may not be able to separate glances focused on
the HUD graphic from glances focused through the HUD
graphic and on the road. Therefore, this AOI coding scheme
segmented the HUD into smaller AOIs, including the HUD
graphic, around the HUD graphic, and on-HUD hazards.
The HUD graphic included all ﬁxations where the driver was
looking directly at the graphic. However, occasionally the HUD
graphic occluded the roadway ahead, and caused participants to
look at locations adjacent to the HUD graphic. These glances
were coded as “around HUD graphic.” When driving, around
HUD glances could include regions of interest such as lane
markings, hazards immediately in front of the driver. These
around HUD graphic glances might also be used to resolve
occlusion (e.g., make sure no hazards behind graphic). Because
the HUD was positioned to aﬀord world-ﬁxed and world-
animated graphics overlaid onto the roadway, participants may
have looked through the HUD in order to check for traﬃc
or other hazards. Thus, we coded these glances as “on-HUD
hazards.” In addition to these AOIs embedded within the HUD,
we also analyzed check glances toward potential cross traﬃc,

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

10

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

Gabbard et al.

AR DriveSim

TABLE 1 | Means, standard deviations (between parentheses), and F- and p-values for the repeated measures ANOVA.

Dependent variable

Display type

Signiﬁcance

Conformal

Screen-ﬁxed

F

p

Workload measured with NASA TLX

Mental demand (%)

Physical demand (%)

Temporal demand (%)

Effort (%)

Frustration (%)

Performance (%)

Raw TLX (%)

Usability

Distraction (%)

Driving impact (%)

Navigation (%)

Trust (%)

Viewing (%)

Glance behavior

Max HUD graphic glance duration (s)

Mean HUD graphic glance duration (s)

Glance count (#)

% Around HUD graphic (%)

% HUD graphic (%)

% Off-HUD hazards (%)

% On-HUD hazards (%)

% HUD (%)

Driving behavior

Mean lane position (ft)

St. Dev of vehicle speed (mph)
St. Dev. of steering degrees (◦)

St. Dev. of lane position (ft)
Peak deceleration (ft/s2)

Stop distance (ft)

Risk taking

Gap size (ft)

Bold and * indicates statistical signiﬁcance.

23.7 (14.8)

10.4 (12.0)

8.50 (11.8)

21.1 (17.2)

14.1 (17.5)

19.6 (23.9)

16.2 (11.4)

16.0 (24.4)

22.1 (29.4)

22.9 (24.9)

9.23 (15.2)

28.6 (31.2)

3.33 (2.49)

1.48 (1.40)

6.00 (3.31)

28.6 (21.0)

34.8 (19.3)

17.4 (13.2)

17.4 (18.9

80.9 (13.4)

0.37 (0.84)

8.29 (3.39)

26.3 (18.0)

1.07 (0.61)

9.12 (5.31)

36.2 (17.3)

11.7 (10.4)

8.91 (8.12)

8.32 (9.48)

12.6 (9.71)

6.91 (11.0)

15.3 (20.7)

10.6 (7.90)

5.05 (7.19)

5.64 (9.39)

4.91 (8.42)

2.00 (4.96)

3.82 (7.19)

1.17 (1.45)

0.71 (1.05)

3.54 (2.39)

41.5 (23.2)

11.8 (13.1)

26.4 (21.6)

18.1 (20.0)

71.5 (22.0)

0.41 (0.88)

8.47 (3.24)

26.0 (18.3)

1.04 (0.53)

9.06 (5.16)

36.1 (17.2)

F (1, 17.58) = 11.2505
F (1, 17.53) = 0.3030
F (1, 18.41) = 0.0001
F (1, 18.57) = 5.1149
F (1, 18.86) = 2.2575
F (1, 17.52) = 3.0807
F (1, 18.02) = 6.6204

F (1, 16.48) = 4.4355
F (1, 18.29) = 9.8564
F (1, 18.16) = 15.3798
F (1, 19.15) = 4.8508
F (1, 18.46) = 25.5842

F (1, 24.95) = 33.526
F (1, 298.8) = 5.888
F (1, 1351) = 4.2756
F (1, 24.32) = 16.257
F (1, 26.07) = 32.464
F (1, 26.61) = 0.137
F (1, 27.26) =0.006
F (1, 28.03) = 0.014

F (1, 319.5) = 0.3977
F (1, 320.5) = 0.3842
F (1, 321.6) = 0.0506
F (1, 319.8) = 0.5251
F (1, 319.8) = 0.0124
F (1, 40.82) = 0.0576

111 (31.9)

114 (31.8)

F (1, 42.25) = 0.1559

0.0036*

0.5889

0.9923

0.0359*

0.1495

0.0967

0.0191*

0.0509

0.0056*

0.0010*

0.0401*

0.0000*

0.0000*

0.0158*

0.0389*

0.0005*

0.0000*

0.7142s

0.9377

0.9055

0.5287

0.5358

0.8221

0.4692

0.9114

0.8116

0.0

mirrors, and other lanes. These “oﬀ-HUD hazards” encompassed
all potential hazards that were visible without looking through
the HUD. After tests for normality, we log transformed all eye-
based response variable data though non-transformed data is
shown in Figure 8.

Conformal resulted in a signiﬁcantly higher maximum glance
duration toward the HUD graphic than Screen-ﬁxed. Conformal
also resulted in longer mean HUD graphic glance durations
than Screen-ﬁxed. Further, the number of glances toward the
HUD Graphic was signiﬁcantly higher when participants used
the Conformal as compared to the Screen-ﬁxed display type.
Conformal was associated with a higher percentage of time
looking at the HUD Graphic than Screen-ﬁxed. Screen-ﬁxed
resulted in a higher percentage of glances around the HUD
graphic than did Conformal. There was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between the percentage of time that participants looked at
oﬀ-HUD hazards, on-HUD hazards, or at the HUD in general.

In summary, because the conformal display was associated
with longer average glances, higher maximum glances, higher
glance count, and higher percentage of time focused on the
HUD graphic speciﬁcally, participants showed a tendency to
allocate more visual attention to the conformal HUD graphic
than the screen-ﬁxed graphic. Conformal was also associated
with less time looking at the area around the HUD graphic and no
diﬀerence in either on-HUD or oﬀ-HUD hazards, showing that
the increased visual attention toward the conformal graphic did
not necessarily impact participants’ hazard scanning behaviors.

Driving Behavior
We analyzed driving data for the total duration of time in
which each navigation cue (conformal arrow and screen-ﬁxed
arrow) was visible on the HUD (492 feet prior to each of the
eight turns). For each turn, we calculated the relevant lateral,
longitudinal, and position control metrics for each trial. We

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

11

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

Gabbard et al.

AR DriveSim

FIGURE 7 | Participants rated the following statements on a scale of 0 (strongly agree) to 100 (strongly disagree): (1) “I did not ﬁnd this interface distracting.” (2) “Using
this interface had a positive impact on my driving.” (3) “It was easy to navigate while using this interface.” (4) “I trusted the information on this interface.” and (5) “The
interface was easy to view”.

FIGURE 8 | The percentage of ﬁxations allocated to each AOI differed between Conformal and Screen-ﬁxed displays. While there is no ideal allocation across AOIs, it
is interesting to note that the percentages vary, particularly between percentage of time spent looking at and around the HUD Graphic.

then searched each trial for times when the participant’s speed
was 0.0 mph and marked these as stops. For the ﬁrst stop
after a graphic appeared, we calculated the distance from the
stopping location to the beginning of the intersection. Table 1
includes a list of the dependent driving behavioral measures, and
we found no signiﬁcant eﬀects of display condition on any of
the driving measures. Further, no participants missed turns at
any intersections.

Risk-Taking
Using the Noldus video recording, we analyzed participants’ risk-
taking behavior by capturing how many cars out of a platoon of
eight vehicles participants allowed to turn (0–8 vehicles) before
deciding to make the turn themselves. If participants turned
between two platoon vehicles, we also captured the gap size (in
feet) of the distance between those two platoon vehicles. Data
from four participants was missing due to human error and

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

12

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

Gabbard et al.

AR DriveSim

therefore we were only able to analyze the risk-taking behavior
of 18 participants (out of 22). We were unable to analyze an
additional ﬁve turns in conformal and two turns in screen-ﬁxed
due to simulation scenario, but the mix across turn directions was
fairly even (34 L-Conformal, 33 R-Conformal, 36 L-Screen-ﬁxed,
34 R-Screen-ﬁxed). Display condition did not impact the number
of cars that participants allowed to turn before making a turn
[X2
= 0.1728, p = 0.6776]. Of those that took a gap, there was no
(1)
eﬀect of display condition on the gap size that participants chose.
Thus, the display type did not signiﬁcantly impact the drivers’
risk-taking behavior, nor did any participant crash into another
vehicle during turns (or at any other time during the drive).

Case Study Discussion
Our user study included 22 participants who experienced both
Conformal and Screen-ﬁxed displays while navigating in our AR
DriveSim. In this study, the Screen-ﬁxed display was associated
with lower workload (measured by mental demand, eﬀort, and
overall workload) and higher usability (measured by driving
demand, navigation, trust, and viewing) than the Conformal
display. The diﬀerence in these self-reported measures shows that
conformal AR graphics are not necessarily a inherently better
user experience, and spatially locating directional graphics into
the forward roadway can cause more workload in some instances.
There were no diﬀerences in driving or risk-taking behaviors
despite the fact that participants using the Screen-ﬁxed display
allocated less visual attention toward the graphic and therefore,
presumably allocated more visual attention toward other
elements relevant to the driving task. The lack of diﬀerences
in driving behaviors can be explained in a study like this
because we did not include events that were unexpected or
unpredictable in our driving scenarios, which might be more
likely to diﬀerentiate between HUD graphics. Surprise events
(unexpected or unpredictable) require rapid responses and
drivers using conformal AR HUDs are especially vulnerable to
change blindness or display clutter that might hinder drivers
particularly in the face of unexpected events because changes in
the display may mask real-world changes. Driving measures are
not as sensitive as other physiological measures (Wierwille and
Eggemeier, 1993) and the allocation of visual attention can be an
early indicator of degraded driving ability. Thus, measures such
as glance behavior provide direction about display design even
when driving performance measures do not diﬀer. Regardless
of the reason for the increased visual attentional allocation, this
work suggests that we should be judicious when designing AR
HUDs for vehicles.

We found diﬀerences in glance behaviors with participants
looking toward the Conformal display more often and for longer
periods of time. It is possible that the increased visual attention
that participants allocated toward the conformal display was an
artifact of the study because the graphic size was bigger in the
Conformal condition. However, participants may have also had
to focus on the conformal graphic for a longer period of time in
order to parse the navigational meaning as it scrolled in from the
top of the display’s ﬁeld of view as participants drove forward.
Thus, recent increased interest from automotive manufacturers
and researchers in using conformal graphics on AR HUDs is

not necessarily synonymous with safer driver behaviors and, if
poorly executed, can negatively impact the user experience as
well. This work indicates that in some scenarios, screen-ﬁxed
graphics may be more eﬀective than conformal, and therefore
perfectly conformal graphics may not be the solution for all AR
interfaces. The temptation to incorporate realistic conformal AR
graphics when designing advanced AR UIs could impede driving
performance and negatively impact driver glance behaviors.
However, much more work should be conducted to test expected
beneﬁts of conformal graphics when compared to other head-up
UI designs. Follow-on studies should further examine how visual
attention allocation toward conformal AR HUD graphics might
be detrimental in instances with diﬀerent road geometry, road
actors, and unexpected/unpredictable events.

AR DRIVESIM DISCUSSION

The user study presented herein is an initial demonstration of
how we can leverage our AR DriveSim to quickly compare UI
prototypes; in this case a conformal AR hologram UI to a screen-
ﬁxed UI inspired by the same visual element (i.e., an arrow)
and further examine how these UIs aﬀect driver behavior and
performance. The AR DriveSim’s capabilities, however, aﬀord
many other types of quick exploration of AR UI designs for
driving that would be otherwise by much more diﬃcult, time
consuming and/or dangerous to conduct. For example, we can
examine how UI designs may move through space (e.g., animated
conformal graphics) or animate on the screen, or even migrate
between the road and the screen depending the context. With
perfect scene geometry, vehicle tracking, and knowledge of road
actors, we can examine UIs attached to other moving vehicles,
pedestrians, and bicyclists without attempting to orchestrate
those actors in an on-road testbed or trying to track them in
real time. We can examine how much tracking error could
be tolerated in an on-road AR HUD UI, or how to annotate
real-world referents that are outside the AR HUD’s ﬁeld of
view. Similarly, we can examine how to design AR UIs that
can coexist in heavy traﬃc, where occlusion is likely to occur
and creative context-aware designs need to be developed and
tested. By instrumenting and actual vehicle cab with sensing
devices (e.g., gesture, voice, etc.) as well as center console
touch screens, we can further explore in-vehicle interaction
techniques for AR in ways that would be less ideal to conduct
in a completely virtual simulated driving environment with
virtualized AR HUD graphics (e.g., due to challenges associated
with availability of rich haptic cues typical in vehicle interfaces
and rendering participants’ own body in highly articulated and
compelling fashion). Lastly, by using an actual optical see-
through HUD (instead of simulated or virtual HUD) we can
examine physiological and cognitive eﬀects of integrating AR
displays with driving scenes such as those associated with context
switching and focal distance switching (Gabbard et al., 2019)
which is not possible with VR-based driving simulation with
simulated AR graphics. In short, AR DriveSim, is a low-cost, full-
scale driving simulator with integrated AR optical see through
head-up display and capabilities to quantify eﬀects of AR UIs on

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

13

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

Gabbard et al.

AR DriveSim

driver performance and behavior. Our design provides unique
and invaluable opportunities for researchers and AR HUD UI
designers that cannot be met on-road or in complete VR-
based simulation.

Designing, building, wiring, and programming the AR-
DriveSim did not come easy, and as such, we provide a list
of lessons learned on the process that may be of value to
other researchers and practitioners striving to create similar
cyber-physical AR testbeds (be it for driving or other AR
application domains).

Regarding the physical

is especially important
can exacerbate

space for a driving simulator,
we recommend larger spaces over smaller ones; at
least
5 × 7 m. First, a larger room aﬀords larger cabs, which
in turn support a wider range of participant sizes. Larger
rooms can also better manage the excessive heat generated
by the multitude of computers, displays and projectors
since warm room
needed. This
temperatures
sickness. Larger
rooms further aﬀord placement of LCD monitors behind
the cab to serve optical side mirrors and a more realistic
driver experience. Taller ceilings
further allow for more
ﬂexibility in purchasing and mounting projectors. If possible,
the physical space contains multiple electrical
ensure that
circuits and a dedicated circuit to power the half cab. If the
cab’s interior blower fan is operational, it will be extremely
useful to have the option to run the fan at its highest speed
to help minimize motion sickness, although this requires
signiﬁcant current.

simulator

When seeking a car to use as a half cab, start by identifying
cars with well-documented CAN bus IDs. This will expedite
the work needed to connect the cab to the driving simulator
software. Also, while it was a good idea to request that the engine
and transmission be removed prior to delivery, we recommend
that the Engine Control Unit remain intact to provide access
to additional CAN bus data. Lastly, if CAN bus IDs are not
available, do not invest much time working with simple on-board
diagnostic readers, as they yield access to a subset of the total
CAN bus traﬃc. Instead borrow or rent a formal automobile
diagnostic tool from a repair shop.

Within the physical cab, we recommend routing essential
cables underneath and behind trim to not only protect the cables
but also to increase the quality of place illusion. That is, you
want participants to believe they are in an actual driving car, not
a wired-up car in a lab. Route cables for displays, IP cameras,
communication, and power before completely reassembling the
cab. The cab should also have adjustable seats and a robust
HUD positioning and calibration process. Participants that are
comfortable and have accurate view of AR content will yield
higher quality data.

If possible, position the cab such that participants entering
the driving simulator space enter from the driver’s side. This
prevents participants from having to navigate the inevitable set
of cables and equipment that are present. Along these lines,
we recommend that extra care be taken to manage cables by
carefully choosing the right lengths and using cable management
techniques. This will help minimize trip hazards for participants
and experimenters.

software unless

Regarding the driving simulator software, it is our strong
recommendation that researchers avoid the temptation to
develop their own driving simulator
the
software itself is the desired contribution. A complete driving
simulator software solution involves much more than VR
graphics including for example, the automated collection of SAE-
established driving metrics, integration of real-time complex
vehicle dynamics, user-friendly graphical scenario authoring
tools, and so forth. While MiniSim is the option we have used,
there are other commercial and open-source options available
(e.g., STISIM and OpenDS).

In terms of the AR HUD software, we found that delegating
the transformation tasks (e.g., MiniSim vehicle pose to X3D
AR HUD pose) to Python helps simplify the experimental
X3D/Javascript source code, and also helps more generally
with future portability. Also, while there are likely cases
where vehicle-relative coordinate system may be useful, we
have found that a common absolute coordinate system greatly
simpliﬁes implementation for dynamic AR HUD graphics. This
is true especially in cases where researchers do not have deep
computing skills, because researchers designing scenarios can
specify world-coordinates for AR HUD programmers to use
on the X3D/Javascript side. Lastly, when animating conformal
AR HUD graphics for turn-based navigation scenarios, we have
found that single Bezier curves provide adequate deﬁnition
for single-turns, and may be linked together to deﬁne more
complex conditions.

LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK

While there are a handful of inherent limitations of computer-
based driving simulation, we present just a few limitations the
driving simulator imposes on our ability to conduct AR HUD
research. First, it would be diﬃcult to conduct research related
to the eﬀects of real-world lighting and color blending on
HUD usage. Even if we could luminance-match, for example,
a nighttime scenario, it is not trivial to introduce glare from
oncoming traﬃc and other lighting eﬀects. Similarly, studying the
usability of AR HUD graphics on driving backgrounds is limited
by the resolution, luminance, dynamic range, and contrast of
the projected driving scene. Our AR HUD simulator is also not
well-positioned to study issues related to depth perception, since
the ﬁxed focal plane HUD coincidentally falls at about the same
distance as the projected driving scene. We also do not yet have
the ability to articulate the cab and present motion-based cues. In
sum, the main limitations restrict our ability to study perceptual
AR issues related to outdoor HUD usage. Such studies would
need to be conducted while driving on a test track, or ﬁxed
indoors looking out.

We can easily envision near-term future work that examines
the role of AR HUDs in autonomous and semi-autonomous
driving. Our integration of a game controller as a secondary
means to drive positions us nicely to begin this work. The
testbed is also well-suited for integration of 3D spatialized audio
to complement the visual HUD UIs. Lastly, we have begun
to integrate gesture and voice recognition technology so that

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

14

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

Gabbard et al.

AR DriveSim

we may examine rich AR HUD interaction. Such capabilities
will allow us to expand our understanding of driver distraction
beyond visual attention.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

content

components. HK
related to software
technical
performed literature review, helped with logistics of setting
up the AR DriveSim and edited manuscript. BJ developed
all hardware/microcontroller components needed for
the
AR DriveSim tested, authored technical content related to
software components.

The datasets generated for this study are available on request to
the corresponding author.

FUNDING

ETHICS STATEMENT

This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. 1816721.

The studies
involving human participants were reviewed
and approved by Virginia Tech Human Research Protection
Program. The patients/participants provided their written
informed consent to participate in this study.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

the manuscript. MS led the user

JG directed the creation and integration of all AR DriveSim
components, designed the user study, and lead authoring
of
conducted
data analysis for user study, drafted discussion associated
with user study, and edited manuscript. KT developed all
software needed for the AR DriveSim tested and authored

study,

REFERENCES

Administration NHTS (2013). Visual-Manual NHTSA Driver Distraction
(No. NHTSA-2010-0053).

Guidelines
In-vehicle Electronic Devices
Washington, DC: National Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration.

for

Bolton, A., Burnett, G., and Large, D. R. (2015). “An investigation of augmented
reality presentations of landmark-based navigation using a head-up display,” in
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces
and Interactive Vehicular Applications (Nottingham: ACM), 56–63.

Bower, M., Howe, C., McCredie, N., Robinson, A., and Grover, D. (2014).
Augmented reality in education–cases, places and potentials. Educ. Media Int.
51, 1–15. doi: 10.1080/09523987.2014.889400

Caird, J. K., Chisholm, S. L., and Lockhart, J. (2008). Do in-vehicle advanced
signs enhance older and younger drivers’ intersection performance? Driving
simulation and eye movement results. Int. J. Hum. Comp. Stud. 66, 132–144.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2006.07.006

Charissis, V., and Papanastasiou, S. (2010). Human-machine collaboration
through vehicle head up display interface. Cogn. Technol. Work 12, 41–50.
doi: 10.1007/s10111-008-0117-0

Charissis, V., Papanastasiou, S., Chan, W., and Peytchev, E. (2013). “Evolution
of a full-windshield HUD designed for current VANET communication
standards,” in 16th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems
10.1109/ITSC.2013.
6728464

(The Hague:

1637–1643.

ITSC),

doi:

de Bruin, A. B., Smits, N., Rikers, R. M., and Schmidt, H. G. (2008). Deliberate
practice predicts performance over time in adolescent chess players and
drop-outs: a linear mixed models analysis. Br. J. Psychol. 99, 473–497.
doi: 10.1348/000712608X295631

Dijksterhuis, C., Stuiver, A., Mulder, B., Brookhuis, K. A., and de Waard, D. (2012).
An adaptive driver support system: user experiences and driving performance
in a simulator. Hum. Factors 54, 772–785. doi: 10.1177/0018720811430502
DüNser, A., Billinghurst, M., Wen, J., Lehtinen, V., and Nurminen, A. (2012).
Exploring the use of handheld AR for outdoor navigation. Comput. Graph. 36,
1084–1095. doi: 10.1016/j.cag.2012.10.001

Fisher, D. L., Rizzo, M., Caird, J., and Lee, J. D. (2011). Handbook of Driving

Simulation for Engineering, Medicine, and Psychology. CRC Press.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We especially thank Randy Waldon and Will Vest for their
endless assistance and mechanical, structural, and electrical
creativity. We thank Lee Lisle for helping dis- and re-assemble
the Mini Cooper, as well as Matt Paradiso and Garret Stair for
decoding the CAN bus and initial microcontroller programming.
Vincent Horosewski, Andrew Veit, and Joseph Meidlinger
from the National Advanced Driving Simulator have also been
instrumental in supporting our work. Lastly, we acknowledge
Progressive Insurance for donating the Mini Cooper in support
of driving research.

Gabbard, J., Mehra, D. G., and Swan, J. E. (2019). Eﬀects of AR display context
switching and focal distance switching on human performance. IEEE Trans.
Vis. Comput. Graph. 25, 2228–2241. doi: 10.1109/TVCG.2018.2832633

Gans, E., Roberts, D., Bennett, M., Towles, H., Menozzi, A., Cook, J., et al. (2015).
“Augmented reality technology for day/night situational awareness for the
dismounted soldier,” in SPIE Defense + Security (Baltimore, MD: International
Society for Optics and Photonics), 947004.

Hart, S. G., and Staveland, L. E. (1988). Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load
Index): results of empirical and theoretical research. Adv. Psychol. 52, 139–183.
doi: 10.1016/S0166-4115(08)62386-9

Kim, H., Isleib, J. D., and Gabbard, J. L. (2016). “Virtual shadow: making
cross traﬃc dynamics visible through augmented reality head up display,” in
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting (Los
Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications), 2093–2097.

Kim, H., Wu, X., Gabbard,

J. L., and Polys, N. F.

(2013). “Exploring
for crash warning systems,” in
head-up augmented reality interfaces
Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Automotive User
Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications (Eindhoven: ACM), 224–227.
doi: 10.1145/2516540.2516566

Kim, S., and Dey, A. K. (2009). “Simulated augmented reality windshield display
as a cognitive mapping aid for elder driver navigation,” in Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Boston, MA:
ACM), 133–142.

Langlois, S. (2013). “ADAS HMI using peripheral vision,” in Proceedings of the
5th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive
Vehicular Applications (Eindhoven: ACM), 74–81.

Lauber, F., and Butz, A. (2013). “Are hmds the better huds?” in 2013 IEEE
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR) (Adelaide,
SA: IEEE), 267–268.

Lorenz, L., Kerschbaum, P., and Schumann, J. (2014). Designing take over
scenarios for automated driving: How does augmented reality support the
driver to get back into the loop? Proc. Hum. Factors Ergon. Soc. Annu. Meet.
58, 1681–1685. doi: 10.1177/1541931214581351

Medenica, Z., Kun, A. L., Paek, T., and Palinko, O. (2011). “Augmented reality
vs. street views: a driving simulator study comparing two emerging navigation
aids,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Human Computer

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

15

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

Gabbard et al.

AR DriveSim

Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services (Stockholm: ACM), 265–274.
doi: 10.1145/2037373.2037414

Meshkati, N. (1988). Heart rate variability and mental workload assessment. Adv.

Psychol. 52, 101–115. doi: 10.1016/S0166-4115(08)62384-5

Neurauter, M.

curve-warning
design. Proc. Hum. Factors Ergon. Soc. Ann. Meet. 49, 1945–1949.
doi: 10.1177/154193120504902213

(2005). Multimodal

warnings:

L.

Olaverri-Monreal, C., Gomes, P., Silveria, M. K., and Ferreira, M. (2012). “In-
vehicle virtual traﬃc lights: a graphical user interface,” in Information Systems
and Technologies (CISTI), 2012 7th Iberian Conference on (Madrid), 1–6.

Pfannmueller, L., Kramer, M., Senner, B., and Bengler, K. (2015). A comparison
of display concepts for a navigation system in an automotive contact analog
head-up display. Proc. Manuf. 3, 2722–2729. doi: 10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.678
Pimentel, J. R., and Fonseca, J. A. (2004). FlexCAN: a ﬂexible architecture for

highly dependable embedded applications. RTN 2004:11.

Plavšic, M., Duschl, M., Tönnis, M., Bubb, H., and Klinker, G. (2009). “Ergonomic
design and evaluation of augmented reality based cautionary warnings for
driving assistance in urban environments,” in Proceedings of International
Ergonomics Association (Beijing).

Politis, I., Brewster, S. A., and Pollick, F. (2014). “Evaluating multimodal driver
displays under varying situational urgency,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (ACM), 4067–4076.
Ran, L., Junfeng, W., Haiying, W., and Gechen, L. (2010). “Design method of
CAN BUS network communication structure for electric vehicle,” in Strategic
Technology (IFOST), 2010 International Forum on (IEEE), 326–329.

Saﬀarian, M., de Winter, J. C. F., and Happee, R. (2013). Enhancing driver car-
following performance with a distance and acceleration display. Hum. Mach.
Syst. IEEE Trans. 43, 8–16. doi: 10.1109/TSMCA.2012.2207105

Sala, S. D., Baddeley, A., Papagno, C., and Spinnler, H. (1995). Dual-task paradigm:
a means to examine the central executive. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 769, 161–172.
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1995.tb38137.x

Sawyer, B. D., Finomore, V. S., Calvo, A. A., and Hancock, P. A. (2014).
Google glass: a driver distraction cause or cure? Hum. Factors 56, 1307–1321.
doi: 10.1177/0018720814555723

Schall, M. C., Rusch, M. L., Lee, J. D., Dawson, J. D., Thomas, G., Aksan, N., et al.
(2013). Augmented reality cues and elderly driver hazard perception. Hum.
Factors 55, 643–658. doi: 10.1177/0018720812462029

Seppelt, B. D., Seaman, S., Lee, J., Angell, L. S., Mehler, B., and Reimer,
B.
(2017). Glass half-full: on-road glance metrics diﬀerentiate crashes
from near-crashes in the 100-car data. Accid. Anal. Prev. 107, 48–62.
doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2017.07.021

Sharﬁ, T., and Shinar, D. (2014). Enhancement of road delineation can reduce

Tippey, K. G., Sivaraj, E., Ardoin, W.-J., Roady, T., and Ferris, T. K. (2014). Texting
while driving using Google glass: investigating the combined eﬀect of heads-up
display and hands-free input on driving safety and performance. Proc. Hum.
Factors Ergon. Soc. Ann. Meet. 58, 2023–2027. doi: 10.1177/1541931214581422
Tippey, K. G., Sivaraj, E., and Ferris, T. K. (2017). Driving while interacting with
Google glass: investigating the combined eﬀect of head-up display and hands-
free input on driving safety and multitask performance. Hum. Factors 59,
671–688. doi: 10.1177/0018720817691406

Tonn, C., Petzold, F., Bimber, O., Grundhöfer, A., and Donath, D. (2008).
and planning
J. Architect. Comp. 6, 41–58.

Spatial
augmented reality
with and within existing buildings.
doi: 10.1260/147807708784640126

architecture—designing

Int.

for

Tonnis, M., and Klinker, G. (2006). “Eﬀective control of a car driver’s attention
for visual and acoustic guidance towards the direction of imminent dangers,”
in Mixed and Augmented Reality, 2006. ISMAR 2006. IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on (Washington DC: IEEE), 13–22.

Tran, C., Bark, K., and Ng-Thow-Hing, V. (2013). “A left-turn driving aid using
projected oncoming vehicle paths with augmented reality,” in Proceedings of
the 5th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive
Vehicular Applications (ACM), 300–307.

Wai-Tat, F., Gasper, J., and Seong-Whan, K. (2013). “Eﬀects of an in-car
augmented reality system on improving safety of younger and older drivers”,
In IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR),
59–66. doi: 10.1109/ISMAR.2013.6671764

Weinberg, G., Harsham, B., and Medenica, Z. (2011). “Evaluating the usability
of a head-up display for selection from choice lists in cars,” in Proceedings of
the 3rd International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive
Vehicular Applications (ACM), 39–46.

Wierwille, W. W.,

(1993). Recommendations
for mental workload measurement
evaluation
and
a
environment. Hum. Factors 35, 263–281. doi: 10.1177/0018720893035
00205

and Eggemeier, F. T.
in

test

Wiesner, C. A., and Klinker, G. (2017). “Overcoming Location Inaccuracies in
augmented reality navigation,” in International Conference on Augmented
Reality, Virtual Reality and Computer Graphics (Ugento: Springer), 377–388.

Wiesner, C. A., Ruf, M., Sirim, D., and Klinker, G.

(2017). “3D-FRC:
depiction of the future road course in the head-up-display,” in 2017 IEEE
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (Nantes), 136–143.
doi: 10.1109/ISMAR.2017.30
Witmer, B. G., and Singer, M.

J. (1998). Measuring presence in virtual
environments: a presence questionnaire. Presence Teleop Virt. Environ. 7,
225–240. doi: 10.1162/105474698565686

safety. J. Safety Res. 49, 61–68. doi: 10.1016/j.jsr.2014.02.011

WIVW (2019). Driving Simulation and SILAB. Available online at: https://wivw.

Shea, R., Fu, D., Sun, A., Cai, C., Ma, X., Fan, X., et al. (2017). Location-Based
Augmented Reality With Pervasive Smartphone Sensors: Inside and Beyond
Pokemon Go! IEEE Access.

Shen, F., Chen, B., Guo, Q., Qi, Y., and Shen, Y. (2013). Augmented reality patient-
speciﬁc reconstruction plate design for pelvic and acetabular fracture surgery.
Int. J. Comp. Assist. Radiol. Surg. 8, 169–179. doi: 10.1007/s11548-012-0775-5
Skarbez, R., Brooks, F. P., and Whitton, M. C. (2017). A survey of presence and

related concepts. ACM Comput. Surv. 50, 1–39. doi: 10.1145/3134301

Smith, M., Gabbard,

J. L., Burnett, G., and Doutcheva, N.

(2017). The
eﬀects of augmented reality head-up displays on drivers’ eye scan patterns,
performance, and perceptions. Int. J. Mob. Hum. Comp. Interact. 9, 1–17.
doi: 10.4018/IJMHCI.2017040101

Smith, M., Gabbard,

J. L., and Conley, C.

(2016). “Head-up vs. head-
down displays: examining traditional methods of display assessment while
driving,” in Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Automotive
User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications (ACM), 185–192.
doi: 10.1145/3003715.3005419

de/en/silab (accessed September 4, 2019).

Wu, W., Blaicher, F., Yang, J., Seder, T., and Cui, D. (2009). “A prototype
of landmark-based car navigation using a full-windshield head-up display
system,” in Proceedings of the 2009 Workshop on Ambient Media Computing
(ACM), 21–28.

Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.

Copyright © 2019 Gabbard, Smith, Tanous, Kim and Jonas. This is an open-access
article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC
BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided
the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.

Frontiers in Robotics and AI | www.frontiersin.org

16

October 2019 | Volume 6 | Article 98

