Employing emerging technologies to develop and evaluate in-vehicle intelligent
systems for driver support: infotainment AR HUD case study
Charissis, Vassilis; Falah, Jannat; Lagoo, Ramesh; Alfalah, Salsabeel F.M.; Khan, Soheeb;
Wang, Shu; Altarteer, Samar; Bram Larbi, Kweku; Drikakis, Dimitris
Published in:
Applied Sciences

DOI:
10.3390/app11041397

Publication date:
2021

Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record

Link to publication in ResearchOnline

Citation for published version (Harvard):
Charissis, V, Falah, J, Lagoo, R, Alfalah, SFM, Khan, S, Wang, S, Altarteer, S, Bram Larbi, K & Drikakis, D
2021, 'Employing emerging technologies to develop and evaluate in-vehicle intelligent systems for driver
support: infotainment AR HUD case study', Applied Sciences, vol. 11, no. 4, 1397, pp. 1-28.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app11041397

General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.

Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please view our takedown policy at https://edshare.gcu.ac.uk/id/eprint/5179 for details
of how to contact us.

Download date: 27. Jun. 2026

Article
Employing Emerging Technologies to Develop and Evaluate
In-Vehicle Intelligent Systems for Driver Support:
Infotainment AR HUD Case Study

Vassilis Charissis 1,*
Samar Altarteer 5, Kweku Bram Larbi 1

and Dimitris Drikakis 6

, Jannat Falah 2, Ramesh Lagoo 1, Salsabeel F. M. Alfalah 3

, Soheeb Khan 1, Shu Wang 4,

1

School of Computing, Engineering and Built Environment, Glasgow Caledonian University,
Glasgow G4-0BA, UK; lagoo.ramesh@gcu.ac.uk (R.L.); soheeb.khan@gcu.ac.uk (S.K.);
kweku.bramlarbi@gcu.ac.uk (K.B.L.)

2 Department of Autonomous Systems, Al-Balqa Applied University, Al Salt 19117, Jordan;

J.alrabeie@bau.edu.jo

3 King Abdullah II School of Information Technology, The University of Jordan, Amman 11942, Jordan;

s.alfalah@ju.edu.jo

4 Volkswagen, Research and Development, Beijing 100068, China; Extern.Shu.Wang@volkswagen.com
5

School of Design and Architecture, Dar Al-Hekma University, Jeddah 22246, Saudi Arabia;
samaraltarteer@gmail.com

6 Defence and Security Research Institute, The University of Nicosia, Nicosia CY-2417, Cyprus;

drikakis.d@unic.ac.cy

* Correspondence: vassilis.charissis@gcu.ac.uk

Citation: Charissis, V.; Falah, J.;

Lagoo, R.; Alfalah, S.F.M.; Khan, S.;

Wang, S.; Altarteer, S.; Larbi, K.B.;

Drikakis, D. Employing Emerging

Technologies to Develop and

Evaluate In-Vehicle Intelligent

Systems for Driver Support:

Infotainment AR HUD Case Study.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397. https://

doi.org/10.3390/app11041397

Academic Editor: Enrico Vezzetti

Received: 17 November 2020

Accepted: 28 January 2021

Published: 4 February 2021

Abstract: The plurality of current infotainment devices within the in-vehicle space produces an
unprecedented volume of incoming data that overwhelm the typical driver, leading to higher
collision probability. This work presents an investigation to an alternative option which aims to
manage the incoming information while offering an uncluttered and timely manner of presenting
and interacting with the incoming data safely. The latter is achieved through the use of an augmented
reality (AR) head-up display (HUD) system, which projects the information within the driver’s ﬁeld
of view. An uncluttered gesture recognition interface provides the interaction with the AR visuals.
For the assessment of the system’s effectiveness, we developed a full-scale virtual reality driving
simulator which immerses the drivers in challenging, collision-prone, scenarios. The scenarios unfold
within a digital twin model of the surrounding motorways of the city of Glasgow. The proposed
system was evaluated in contrast to a typical head-down display (HDD) interface system by 30 users,
showing promising results that are discussed in detail.

Keywords: augmented reality; human-computer interaction; head-up display; digital twin; artiﬁcial
intelligence; simulation; driver distraction; gesture recognition; smart city; virtual reality

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral

with regard to jurisdictional claims in

published maps and institutional afﬁl-

1. Introduction

iations.

Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.

Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.

This article is an open access article

distributed under

the terms and

conditions of the Creative Commons

Attribution (CC BY) license (https://

creativecommons.org/licenses/by/

4.0/).

Contemporary infotainment devices are introduced in car interiors to provide crucial
information related to the vehicle and different forms of audio–visual entertainment. Yet
the number of devices, their position, and the attention-seeking interfaces have multiplied
exponentially, following the infotainment trends provided by popular, non-vehicular
conduits, such as smartphones and tablets. Notably, such devices were primarily designed
to attract the user’s attention, hence not compatible with the driving process. The vehicular
devices replicate the incoming information and engross the driver’s situational and spatial
awareness through ineffective gazing at the dashboard’s interactive screens. The latter
provides a regularly updated stream of information facilitating satellite navigation and
incoming mobile communications amongst other systems. As all the aforementioned
information conduits are positioned within the vehicular dashboard, which is below the

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11041397

https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci

applied  sciences(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

2 of 28

driver’s ﬁeld of view (FOV), they are forcing the driver to look down, hence these devices
are also known as head-down displays (HDD).

Due to their position, they can divert the driver’s concentration from the primary task
and result in misjudgment of trafﬁc conditions and vehicle control requirements [1,2]. As
such, in a collision-prone situation, the driver’s reaction/response time (RT) is reduced sig-
niﬁcantly [3–5]. Amongst the plethora of devices and applications located in the dashboard,
some have been particularly distracting as they require the driver’s immediate attention
and response, such as mobile phone communication (mobile call and texting), [6–9], and
navigation guidance systems [10,11]. Notably, the imposed cognitive load to the driver in
both cases can rapidly reduce the concentration in the main task and result in collisions, as
the driver suffers from an attention bottleneck due to the plurality and intensiveness of the
incoming information [8,9,12]. Previous and concurrent efforts to raise public awareness
with regards to the hazards involved in the inappropriate use of those technologies during
driving have not managed to mitigate this issue [7].

On our earlier work, it was deemed ideal to utilise the vast windshield area in front
of the driver’s FOV with the use of a head-up display (HUD) system. The latter reduces
the gazing time in the infotainment devices typically positioned in the lower section of the
dashboard (i.e., HDD) [1,2,12]. The idea to evolve the AR HUD interface concept and in-
clude a direct manipulation interface, based on a gesture recognition system stemmed from
previous encouraging results. As such, the driver will not passively receive information
and try to control them through the HDD buttons and touchscreens. The latter interaction
with the HDD components deﬁes the purpose or reduces the efﬁciency of a HUD system, as
the driver is still required to take the eye-off-the-road and the hands off-the-steering-wheel.
In contrast, the proposed system enables the driver to control the AR symbols through
a novel gesture recognition user interface (UI) presented in earlier studies [4,13]. The
employment of a gesture recognition system that offers to the driver the ability to directly
operate the AR symbols projected in the HUD section of the windshield signiﬁcantly
reduces the gazing time off-the-road [13]. For the evaluation of the system, we have utilised
a full-scale, virtual reality (VR) driving simulator, which was customized to accommodate
the proposed AR HUD interface. The simulation scenarios were based on real-life accidents
which were replicated in the VR driving simulation environment. For this purpose, an
instance of the digital twin city of Glasgow and the surrounding motorways was modelled
to accommodate the scenarios, increase the immersion and the realism of the simulation.
Thirty drivers performed the evaluation and the results are presented analytically in the
following sections.

2. Current Issues, System Rationale and Objectives
2.1. Infotainment Systems’ Distraction

A major issue currently hindering the development of in-vehicle infotainment systems
is their negative impact towards driver’s attention during driving which increases the
probability of accident occurrences [6,11,14,15]. This issue has been investigated extensively
by various studies aiming to provide comprehensive guidelines for the development of the
aforementioned devices [15–17].

Yet, conveying the digital information that current drivers are accustomed to through
their smart-phones and other similar devices, whilst maintaining the driver’s undivided
attention to the driving task, remains a challenging task. Notably, the tendency to provide
interconnected information to the user and inﬁltrate every aspect of daily life is currently
appearing through the Internet of Things (IoT). IoT integrates the social element of mobility
through vehicular interactivity and exchange of information primarily through vehicular
ad-hoc network systems (VANETS), [3,18]. This phenomenon is expected to increase
exponentially and provide a vast number of updating information, from various outlets
(i.e., smart home temperature, security cameras, and ﬁre alarm monitoring amongst other),
directly to the driver’s infotainment system. This social element of network communication
appears as a new segment of IoT, namely the Social Internet of Vehicles (SIoV). SIoV entails

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

3 of 28

and interconnects a diverse spectrum of road users and vehicles which could share a
plethora of data including audio, video, messaging, audio communication, and vehicular
sensors’ measurements, amongst others [19,20].

As such, a system that provides prioritisation of incoming data and appropriate
presentation to the driver is required to control and conform these multiple sources of
information. Apart from the future complexity of IoT incoming data, a concurrent issue
stems from less complex devices such as the smartphones and navigation systems.

Notably, a large number of drivers are indulging in “quick” texting or short communi-
cation through their mobile phones which increases the accident probability signiﬁcantly as
shown in previous studies [10,21]. Similarly, drivers attempt to reprogram a route on their
satellite navigation system or follow provided trafﬁc updates and alternative routes which
can be proved equally hazardous to the mobile phone applications [11,12]. This major issue
of driver distraction by infotainment devices has challenged the automotive and electronics
manufacturers to provide a solution. To this end, the above industries have attempted to
tackle it by primarily embedding the external devices (smartphones and sat-nav) directly
to a more homogenous environment in the vehicles’ dashboards. Although this approach
reduced the driver’s multitasking challenge between different devices and interfaces, it
still requires the frequent diversion of attention from the driving task to interact with the
dashboard section of the car.

Apart from the driving function, which can be deﬁned as the primary task, all the new
infotainment systems are falling under the category of secondary tasks. Depending on
the amount of attention and interaction required, the secondary functions can be deﬁned
through a scale of 1–5 with ﬁve requiring the maximum driver attention [22]. These ﬁve
groups are manual only, manual primarily, visual only, mostly visual and visual-manual,
respectively. The latter subgroup has a highly attention-seeking propensity and requires
both visual and manual interaction [22] intensively.

As such, the visual–manual subset covers the majority of smartphone applications and
navigation systems typically found in a vehicular dashboard. As the dashboard estate hosts
the majority of these devices and is physically located on the lower part of the driver’s FOV,
the driver increases dramatically the eyes-off-the-road time duration which consequently
increases the collision probability [21,22]. Previous studies presented an alternative, namely
HUD, that could alleviate such issues and could utilise the windshield estate [23–27]. As
stated above, the windshield is currently unused in the majority of the vehicles except
for very few, small-size, HUD interfaces introduced in the ﬂagship or bespoke models
of high-end car manufacturers. Yet these systems still require visual and, in some cases,
manual interaction through the dashboard section and/or the steering wheel, reducing the
beneﬁts of the HUD.

2.2. System Design Rationale

Adhering to the above issues and observations, we have evolved our previous AR
HUD interface designed to attend to driver’s requests, yet to provide the incoming info-
tainment data in a safe and accessible manner [2,3,23,24].

Due to the provided windshield estate and the proximity to driver’s FOV, a HUD
solution was deemed essential for a complex set of infotainment systems’ functionalities
aiming to minimise driver distraction by controlling the multiple stimuli provided by in-
vehicle infotainment devices [2,4,14,15]. To mitigate the aforementioned issue, we designed
and implemented a prototype medium-size, HUD interface which aims to improve driver
performance and reduce signiﬁcantly the eyes-off-the-road effect resulting from the use of
infotainment systems as presented in Figure 1.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

4 of 28

Figure 1. Screenshot of the fully functional Augmented Reality (AR) Head-Up Display (HUD) and conventional Head-Down
Display (HDD) interfaces in the Virtual Reality (VR) driving simulator.

Being aware of the limitations posed by the small-factor HUD and the required
interactions through dashboard devices, our medium-sized HUD design utilises a more
signiﬁcant segment of the windshield. Previous evaluation results provided an insight into
the HUD requirements that improve driver’s response times (RT) and situational awareness
during driving under adverse weather conditions and low visibility. They highlighted the
improved efﬁciency of the large-factor and full-windshield HUD interfaces [1,2,23,28].

Prior studies in the development of efﬁcient and user-friendly AR-HUD interfaces
provided a crucial background for the currently proposed system and identiﬁed in advance
potential design and development issues. A recurrent issue was the lack of interaction
with the incoming infotainment data which were presented in the HUD interface [28,29].
Similarly, the existing HUD interfaces provided by a large number of automotive manufac-
turers are plagued with complicated menus and buttons positioned in the HDD space or in
awkward to reach positions, around the steering wheel.

The proposed novel HUD interface aims to keep the driver in touch with the incoming
information (i.e., mobile phone and navigation system data) whilst maintaining a driver’s
focus on the primary task of driving and alleviating the cognitive load of the in-vehicle
infotainment systems.

2.3. Implementation Rationale

The combinatory approach of a HUD and a gesture interface intent to facilitate the
multiple and diverse infotainment systems that currently distract the driver. Moreover,
the mobile and wireless communication systems and protocols have come under intense
research focus in concert with the continuing development of mobile services, applications,
and devices offering a broader spectrum of communication conduits to the users [18,30].

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 29   Figure 1. Screenshot of the fully functional Augmented Reality (AR) Head-Up Display (HUD) and conventional Head-Down Display (HDD) interfaces in the Virtual Reality (VR) driving simulator. Being aware of the limitations posed by the small-factor HUD and the required in-teractions through dashboard devices, our medium-sized HUD design utilises a more sig-nificant segment of the windshield. Previous evaluation results provided an insight into the HUD requirements that improve driver’s response times (RT) and situational aware-ness during driving under adverse weather conditions and low visibility. They high-lighted the improved efficiency of the large-factor and full-windshield HUD interfaces [1,2,23,28]. Prior studies in the development of efficient and user-friendly AR-HUD interfaces provided a crucial background for the currently proposed system and identified in ad-vance potential design and development issues. A recurrent issue was the lack of interac-tion with the incoming infotainment data which were presented in the HUD interface [28,29]. Similarly, the existing HUD interfaces provided by a large number of automotive manufacturers are plagued with complicated menus and buttons positioned in the HDD space or in awkward to reach positions, around the steering wheel. The proposed novel HUD interface aims to keep the driver in touch with the incom-ing information (i.e., mobile phone and navigation system data) whilst maintaining a driver’s focus on the primary task of driving and alleviating the cognitive load of the in-vehicle infotainment systems. 2.3. Implementation Rationale The combinatory approach of a HUD and a gesture interface intent to facilitate the multiple and diverse infotainment systems that currently distract the driver. Moreover, the mobile and wireless communication systems and protocols have come under intense research focus in concert with the continuing development of mobile services, applica-tions, and devices offering a broader spectrum of communication conduits to the users [18,30]. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

5 of 28

As this technology progresses at a faster rate than its integration to the vehicles by the
automotive industry, a large segment of the concurrent car-market, namely used and older
vehicle-models, will require a retrospective integration. In particular, the used vehicles’
market is signiﬁcantly larger, representing sales numbers of used versus new models in
the ratio of 3:1 in the UK, 2.6:1 in the US, 2.4:1 in France, and 2:1 in Germany, amongst
other countries with similar market trends [31]. Notably, any further ﬁnancial turbulence
in worldwide or national level increases further this ratio difference in favour of the used
cars market.

As such, the provision of an off-the-shelf consumer electronic system presents a viable
option for retroﬁtting to older vehicle ﬂeets. This resolves a major issue in which most of the
older vehicles are becoming disassociated from the current driver’s digital ecosystem due
to incompatibility between the vehicular electronics/infotainment systems and the latest
mobile technologies. As the proposed system aims to increase the safety and regulate the
use of the latter devices in the car, this retrospective compatibility offers democratisation
of technology and enhances the socioeconomic equality. To this end, the proposed HUD
system offers a combinatory approach of existing hardware components and proprietary
software. The point of using readily available hardware was to avoid the reliance on each
automotive manufacturer’s proprietary systems.

The proposed HUD system could be devised in an adaptable and ﬂexible position-
ing of the individual hardware components (i.e., glass combiner, mini-HUD projector,
micro-computer unit, and gesture recognition sensor). The in-house developed software
will also aid the user in the system calibration and alignment between the components,
accommodating the different design aspects of various dashboards and instrumentation
panel hubs. A prototype version was utilised for the simulation and evaluation of the
system.

Consequently, the complete and streamlined version of the system will be transferable
to new vehicles as well, either as a retrospective system or as a bespoke system directly
embedded to new vehicle models during the manufacturing process.

2.4. Objectives

Adhering to the above observations, the aim of the proposed AR HUD system is to
reduce the driver’s distraction by the current attention-commanding infotainment devices
to improve driver safety. To achieve this, the researchers have employed various emerging
technologies and strategies in the system design and have evaluated a prototype system
within a VR simulation environment. The main research objectives for this work are the
following:

a.

b.

c.

d.

e.

Design interrupt strategies that could regulate the incoming information from various
sources. These strategies will collect, categorise, and prioritise the incoming data,
and release it at safe intervals/points.
Provide a minimalistic visual interface (AR) which will be projected in a visible yet
non-distractive position within the driver’s ﬁeld of view through a medium-size
HUD system. This aims to enable the driver to maintain eyes on the road whilst
receiving data or interacting with the HUD interface.
Employ gesture recognition for the interaction with the AR visual interface through
the minimal movement of the hands, aiming to maintain hands at the steering wheel
at all times.
Evaluate the system in a VR simulator, collecting data on collision occurrence, speed,
lane positioning, distance from neighbouring vehicles, and driver’s response times,
with a typical HDD versus the prototype HUD interface.
The evaluation will further assess the proposed system’s acceptability and perceived
ease of use and safety.

The following section presents the implementation of the aforementioned objectives,
the development process and challenges encountered during the design and development
of the proposed system.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

6 of 28

3. Proposed AR HUD System
3.1. Gesture Recognition Control

The utilisation of gestural controls as compared to conventional controls offers the
advantage of performing control tasks without affecting the visual and cognitive attention
required for driving [31]. Markedly, the gestures contain information that can be conveyed
whilst minimally relying on vision, thus affording minimal “eyes off the road” time. Thus,
gestural controls could be well placed for developing speciﬁc in-vehicle interaction tasks
that can minimise driver distraction [32].

Natural gestures, in particular, offer an additional advantage in their intuitive nature,
as they are gestures commonly accompanying human to human conversation. Thus, they
can be easily memorised and require minimal training, causing minimum cognitive driver
workload. These qualities present them as a promising option for use with in-vehicle
secondary controls [32].

This has been documented in previous studies where participant drivers reported
less distraction and had fewer errors in performance when utilising gestural controls as
compared to haptic controls [31–35]. Unlike speech-based controls, gestural controls are
not affected by noisy conditions, dialects, and accents that can be a source of error for
speech-based controls [36].

One of the most important beneﬁts for the in-vehicle interface is the absence of
physical contact with any form of screen or surface. As such, the driver is not required
to focus his/her attention to touch a particular point in the HDD that could perform the
required task as presented in previous studies [14,15,32]. Notably, the drivers of the studies
mentioned above also favoured the gestural controls compared to conventional ones.

Acceptance models have indicated that gestural controls would be readily acknowl-
edged by the drivers for controlling secondary tasks if these can be performed with one
hand without distraction [31,32,34].

The above suggestion supports the hypothesis that gestures are a rightful alternative
for the current paradigm of physical interaction by requiring minimum workload for
operation and less continuous moves. Consequently, it could improve operation proﬁciency
and increase road safety [34,35].

The functionality of a gesture-based system could, however, be affected if the gesture
interfaces are not self-revealing, so the user has to know beforehand the speciﬁc set of
gestures that the system recognises and the function that they correspond to. As such, it
becomes more cumbersome for the user to memorise the correct gestural command set as
the number of gestures increase. This is an evident problem with some early adaptations
of gesture recognition technology by some automotive manufacturers. To avoid this issue,
our proposed gesture recognition interface has been seamlessly coupled with a visual HUD
interface, as seen in Figures 1 and 2.

The development of the proposed AR HUD system entailed multiple iterations on the
visual and gestural interface, as well as the positioning of the proposed AR symbols. The
following subsections present the design and implementation considerations that led to
the prototype system.

3.2. AR HUD Interface Position

To provide an unobtrusive vision to the external scene, the projection of the three

symbols is consistent with the visual elements’ recommendations of SAE J2831 [37].

Furthermore, the projected AR interface appears approximately 2.5 m from the wind-
shield to avoid the effect of “double accommodation” of the driver’s gaze an issue that
forces the user to focus either on the external environment (far view) or in the close-
proximity projection (short view) [23,28]. Although the projection is within the driver’s
ﬁeld of view (FOV), the interface appears in the lower section of the windscreen for two
main reasons. The ﬁrst is that the particular section, according to previous studies is ideal
for the non-urgent type of information, which register within the driver’s perspective yet
have minimum-attention requirements [38,39].

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

7 of 28

Previous studies investigating the optimal position of HUD-based messages suggested
that the ideal location for a speciﬁc application depends on the relative importance at-
tributed to this by interface designers and previous performance metrics collected [23,24,40].
Hence, depending on the type of information (i.e., crucial/urgent or supplementary/non-
urgent) that will be superimposed onto the windshield, it is feasible to “highlight” or
“shadow” its readability by changing its position. Where the middle sections are reserved
for crucial information (i.e., collision warnings) whilst higher and lower, closer to the edges
of the windshield, is ideal space for supplementary information (i.e., infotainment).

Secondly, the selected projection position, closer to the dashboard, was deemed ideal
because the driver can access and interact with the AR interface with a small pointing
gesture without taking the hands off-the-steering wheel.

Figure 2. Screenshot of the fully functional AR HUD and conventional HDD interfaces in the VR driving simulator.

3.3. Visual Interface

The visual elements of the interface were designed to provide simple and non-
distractive indications of mobile phone calls, text messaging, and navigation information
which are deemed as the most attention-seeking systems [39,40]. Following previous
work, various combinations of symbols and their activities have been tested and grad-
ually distilled to only three main symbols, namely (a) Home, (b) Text Message, and (c)
Map/Navigation as depicted in Figure 3 [4,14,41,42].

The Home symbol follows the standard approach of transferring the user to the main
menu instantly from other parts of the interface. In this case, the Home symbol is re-setting
any interaction that the driver had with the other two symbols. The second symbol, the
Text Message symbol, had a dual functionality. It predominantly provides the driver with
a gentle/understated warning related to the incoming messages. The number of messages
received is highlighted in a superscript circle positioned in the right top corner of the
Text symbol as depicted in Figure 4. The secondary functionality of the latter symbol is
to present the number of missed calls and provide in a brief text format, the metadata
of the missed calls which include callers’ name and the time of the call. The activation
and interaction with the symbols are prioritised by interrupt strategies which distil the
incoming information and release them in a timely and safe manner, preventing the user
from browsing the infotainment data.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 29   Figure 2. Screenshot of the fully functional AR HUD and conventional HDD interfaces in the VR driving simulator. The development of the proposed AR HUD system entailed multiple iterations on the visual and gestural interface, as well as the positioning of the proposed AR symbols. The following subsections present the design and implementation considerations that led to the prototype system. 3.2. AR HUD Interface Position To provide an unobtrusive vision to the external scene, the projection of the three symbols is consistent with the visual elements’ recommendations of SAE J2831 [37]. Furthermore, the projected AR interface appears approximately 2.5 m from the wind-shield to avoid the effect of “double accommodation” of the driver’s gaze an issue that forces the user to focus either on the external environment (far view) or in the close-prox-imity projection (short view) [23,28]. Although the projection is within the driver’s field of view (FOV), the interface appears in the lower section of the windscreen for two main reasons. The first is that the particular section, according to previous studies is ideal for the non-urgent type of information, which register within the driver’s perspective yet have minimum-attention requirements [38,39]. Previous studies investigating the optimal position of HUD-based messages sug-gested that the ideal location for a specific application depends on the relative importance attributed to this by interface designers and previous performance metrics collected [23,24,40]. Hence, depending on the type of information (i.e., crucial/urgent or supple-mentary/non-urgent) that will be superimposed onto the windshield, it is feasible to “highlight” or “shadow” its readability by changing its position. Where the middle sec-tions are reserved for crucial information (i.e., collision warnings) whilst higher and lower, closer to the edges of the windshield, is ideal space for supplementary information (i.e., infotainment). Secondly, the selected projection position, closer to the dashboard, was deemed ideal because the driver can access and interact with the AR interface with a small pointing gesture without taking the hands off-the-steering wheel.   Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

8 of 28

Figure 3. Three main interface symbols as appear in the VR driving simulator: (a) Home, (b) Naviga-
tion/Map, and (c) Text Message symbols.

Figure 4. Screenshot of the simulation presenting the sub-symbol of the received Text Message as a
superscript red circle with the number of received and stored messages.

The interrupt strategy is activated while driving in high speeds typically encountered
in a motorway environment which has the highest probability of fatal collisions. Hence,
driver’s concentration should remain solely in the main task of driving. Similarly, the
same communication interruption and archiving of incoming information are activated in
the dense urban environment. Weather conditions are also taken into consideration and
increase or reduce the time of the withheld infotainment data depending on the adversity
of the weather phenomena. An additional set of sub-symbols were developed to read
and navigate in-between the received messages and the navigation data, as presented
in Figure 5. The design of these symbols maintained a simple form of arrows (left and
right) and a circular indication showing the number of the received/unread messages as

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 29  3.3. Visual Interface The visual elements of the interface were designed to provide simple and non-dis-tractive indications of mobile phone calls, text messaging, and navigation information which are deemed as the most attention-seeking systems [39,40]. Following previous work, various combinations of symbols and their activities have been tested and gradually distilled to only three main symbols, namely (a) Home, (b) Text Message, and (c) Map/Navigation as depicted in Figure 3 [4,14,41,42]. The Home symbol follows the standard approach of transferring the user to the main menu instantly from other parts of the interface. In this case, the Home symbol is re-setting any interaction that the driver had with the other two symbols. The second symbol, the Text Message symbol, had a dual functionality. It predominantly provides the driver with a gentle/understated warning related to the incoming messages. The number of messages received is highlighted in a superscript circle positioned in the right top corner of the Text symbol as depicted in Figure 4. The secondary functionality of the latter symbol is to pre-sent the number of missed calls and provide in a brief text format, the metadata of the missed calls which include callers’ name and the time of the call. The activation and inter-action with the symbols are prioritised by interrupt strategies which distil the incoming information and release them in a timely and safe manner, preventing the user from browsing the infotainment data.  Figure 3. Three main interface symbols as appear in the VR driving simulator: (a) Home, (b) Navi-gation/Map, and (c) Text Message symbols. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 29   Figure 4. Screenshot of the simulation presenting the sub-symbol of the received Text Message as a superscript red circle with the number of received and stored messages. The interrupt strategy is activated while driving in high speeds typically encountered in a motorway environment which has the highest probability of fatal collisions. Hence, driver’s concentration should remain solely in the main task of driving. Similarly, the same communication interruption and archiving of incoming information are activated in the dense urban environment. Weather conditions are also taken into consideration and increase or reduce the time of the withheld infotainment data depending on the adversity of the weather phenomena. An additional set of sub-symbols were developed to read and navigate in-between the received messages and the navigation data, as presented in Figure 5. The design of these symbols maintained a simple form of arrows (left and right) and a circular indication showing the number of the received/unread messages as mentioned above. During the user-interface (UI) design it was considered essential to provide self-explanatory and straight-forward symbols that operate promptly in contrast to the vast majority of current automotive industry interfaces which are tuned towards the “family style” required by each brand. The latter intends to maintain a brand’s identity from the exterior to the interior of the vehicle design and between the different vehicle models pro-vided by the same brand.  Figure 5. Sub-symbols for interface navigation—(a,b) Arrows for interface navigation to previous or next message, (c) Red Sphere with the number of messages received. Yet, this could also be a negative influence in the interface design, which is forced to follow particular visual elements that might not help the driver or in some cases hinder the driving process. Such interfaces are further burdened with the incorporation of mul-tiple other infotainment systems that in many cases need to be also redesigned to follow the above branding mantra, resulting in complex interfaces and various layers of selec-tions.   Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

9 of 28

mentioned above. During the user-interface (UI) design it was considered essential to
provide self-explanatory and straight-forward symbols that operate promptly in contrast
to the vast majority of current automotive industry interfaces which are tuned towards the
“family style” required by each brand. The latter intends to maintain a brand’s identity
from the exterior to the interior of the vehicle design and between the different vehicle
models provided by the same brand.

Figure 5. Sub-symbols for interface navigation—(a,b) Arrows for interface navigation to previous or
next message, (c) Red Sphere with the number of messages received.

Yet, this could also be a negative inﬂuence in the interface design, which is forced to
follow particular visual elements that might not help the driver or in some cases hinder the
driving process. Such interfaces are further burdened with the incorporation of multiple
other infotainment systems that in many cases need to be also redesigned to follow the
above branding mantra, resulting in complex interfaces and various layers of selections.

3.4. Gesture Recognition Interface

The minimalistic approach of the visual interface was further carried on to the physical
interactions provided to the driver. Contemporary sets of gestures used in prototype
vehicular interfaces were also tested by the focus group, with little success as the number
and complexity of the corresponding gestures perplexed the users, resulting in numerous
error commands. The most memorable and natural movement of selecting a symbol/button
was by “clicking” a virtual switch. As such, we introduced a simple “air-clicking” gesture
which applied to all the interactions with the visual interface. In this case, the driver does
not have to memorise or think which particular gesture corresponds to a different selection.
This differentiation is clariﬁed by the visual interface, which provides a fast and uncluttered
conduit for the provision of each symbol selection.

In particular, the interaction with the symbols through “air-clicking” gesture is visually
conﬁrmed by four distinctive states of the symbol namely; Idle state, Decline state, Hover
state, and the Selected state as shown in Figure 6. The simplicity of the “air-clicking” gesture
in conjunction with the precise visual conﬁrmation of the selections support timely comple-
tion of the process [5,15,29]. For the evaluation process, the gesture recognition system was
provided by a Leap Motion sensor positioned on the top of the central instrumentation hub.

Figure 6. Four states of gesture interaction presented visually to the driver—(a) Idle state, (b) Warning
State, (c) Hover state, and (d) Selected state.

This hub is located behind the steering wheel, offering an optimal position for direct
manipulation interaction with the AR symbols. The latter could be reached with a swift
movement of one hand, and in some cases, taller drivers could engage the system with just
their pointer ﬁnger without lifting their hands from the steering wheel. Future work will
intend to provide a self-calibration system adhering to each driver’s characteristics [24].

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 29   Figure 4. Screenshot of the simulation presenting the sub-symbol of the received Text Message as a superscript red circle with the number of received and stored messages. The interrupt strategy is activated while driving in high speeds typically encountered in a motorway environment which has the highest probability of fatal collisions. Hence, driver’s concentration should remain solely in the main task of driving. Similarly, the same communication interruption and archiving of incoming information are activated in the dense urban environment. Weather conditions are also taken into consideration and increase or reduce the time of the withheld infotainment data depending on the adversity of the weather phenomena. An additional set of sub-symbols were developed to read and navigate in-between the received messages and the navigation data, as presented in Figure 5. The design of these symbols maintained a simple form of arrows (left and right) and a circular indication showing the number of the received/unread messages as mentioned above. During the user-interface (UI) design it was considered essential to provide self-explanatory and straight-forward symbols that operate promptly in contrast to the vast majority of current automotive industry interfaces which are tuned towards the “family style” required by each brand. The latter intends to maintain a brand’s identity from the exterior to the interior of the vehicle design and between the different vehicle models pro-vided by the same brand.  Figure 5. Sub-symbols for interface navigation—(a,b) Arrows for interface navigation to previous or next message, (c) Red Sphere with the number of messages received. Yet, this could also be a negative influence in the interface design, which is forced to follow particular visual elements that might not help the driver or in some cases hinder the driving process. Such interfaces are further burdened with the incorporation of mul-tiple other infotainment systems that in many cases need to be also redesigned to follow the above branding mantra, resulting in complex interfaces and various layers of selec-tions.   Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 29  3.4. Gesture Recognition Interface The minimalistic approach of the visual interface was further carried on to the phys-ical interactions provided to the driver. Contemporary sets of gestures used in prototype vehicular interfaces were also tested by the focus group, with little success as the number and complexity of the corresponding gestures perplexed the users, resulting in numerous error commands. The most memorable and natural movement of selecting a symbol/but-ton was by “clicking” a virtual switch. As such, we introduced a simple “air-clicking” gesture which applied to all the interactions with the visual interface. In this case, the driver does not have to memorise or think which particular gesture corresponds to a dif-ferent selection. This differentiation is clarified by the visual interface, which provides a fast and uncluttered conduit for the provision of each symbol selection. In particular, the interaction with the symbols through “air-clicking” gesture is visu-ally confirmed by four distinctive states of the symbol namely; Idle state, Decline state, Hover state, and the Selected state as shown in Figure 6. The simplicity of the “air-click-ing” gesture in conjunction with the precise visual confirmation of the selections support timely completion of the process [5,15,29]. For the evaluation process, the gesture recog-nition system was provided by a Leap Motion sensor positioned on the top of the central instrumentation hub.  Figure 6. Four states of gesture interaction presented visually to the driver—(a) Idle state, (b) Warning State, (c) Hover state, and (d) Selected state. This hub is located behind the steering wheel, offering an optimal position for direct manipulation interaction with the AR symbols. The latter could be reached with a swift movement of one hand, and in some cases, taller drivers could engage the system with just their pointer finger without lifting their hands from the steering wheel. Future work will intend to provide a self-calibration system adhering to each driver’s characteristics [24]. Notably, the implementation and evaluation of the proposed method have been ap-plied retrospectively to an older generation vehicle as it is described in the simulation requirements section that follows. Nevertheless, the close-proximity provision of the interface to the driver’s hands and the visual presentation of the interface directly in the drivers FOV achieves to maintain the driver’s eyes-on-the-road and the hands-on-the-wheel at all times. The lack of the lat-ter two conditions poses a major issue for the existing infotainment systems as they cannot currently provide information in a non-distractive manner for the driver [43–45]. 4. Evaluation Method and Simulation Requirements To illustrate the domain adaptation problem and our proposal, we embedded the proposed AR HUD interface in our fourth generation VR driving simulator. The simulator is designed to be customisable and to accommodate different in-vehicle systems and in-terfaces that require evaluation in various driving conditions, road networks, and traffic flow scenarios. The evaluation process entailed a pre-test questionnaire aiming to gather information regarding driving experience, mobile and computer technologies, as well as driving habits and other demographic information such as age and gender amongst others. In turn, the users were introduced to the driving simulator and they were provided with 10 min ap-Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

10 of 28

Notably, the implementation and evaluation of the proposed method have been applied ret-
rospectively to an older generation vehicle as it is described in the simulation requirements
section that follows.

Nevertheless, the close-proximity provision of the interface to the driver’s hands and
the visual presentation of the interface directly in the drivers FOV achieves to maintain the
driver’s eyes-on-the-road and the hands-on-the-wheel at all times. The lack of the latter
two conditions poses a major issue for the existing infotainment systems as they cannot
currently provide information in a non-distractive manner for the driver [43–45].

4. Evaluation Method and Simulation Requirements

To illustrate the domain adaptation problem and our proposal, we embedded the
proposed AR HUD interface in our fourth generation VR driving simulator. The simulator
is designed to be customisable and to accommodate different in-vehicle systems and
interfaces that require evaluation in various driving conditions, road networks, and trafﬁc
ﬂow scenarios.

The evaluation process entailed a pre-test questionnaire aiming to gather informa-
tion regarding driving experience, mobile and computer technologies, as well as driving
habits and other demographic information such as age and gender amongst others. In
turn, the users were introduced to the driving simulator and they were provided with
10 min approximately to familiarise themselves with the simulation system. During the
familiarisation process, the drivers experienced a collision-scenario free trafﬁc ﬂow in
sunny/clear weather conditions. After the familiarisation round, each user drove the
simulation with and without the HUD interface. The order was selected randomly for
every user to minimise trial order bias.

On the ﬁnal third stage of the evaluation process, commencing the actual driving
simulation, each user was provided with a post-test questionnaire aiming to acquire the
driver’s subjective feedback regarding the usability of the proposed system. A succinct de-
brieﬁng session completed the acquisition of the user’s feedback. It offered an opportunity
for users to provide further suggestions and thoughts related to their experience with the
proposed AR HUD interface.

The drivers’ and systems’ performance were measured primarily by the number of
collisions that occurred per trial, yet the simulator recorded several other human responses
and performance variables during each simulation. These measurements were recorded
continuously, providing a reﬁned view of the driving patterns and accident propensity that
arose throughout every moment in the simulation [2,23].

The subjective feedback questionnaires were designed to respond to an explicitly
designed for the purpose, technology acceptance model (TAM). This customised TAM
was intended to identify and quantify the drivers’ system experience and their intention
to accept and adopt this technology for future vehicles or incorporate retrospectively on
the existing car-models. As this paper is presenting the collision results with and without
the proposed AR HUD system as well as the individual driver performance, it is not this
paper’s remit to present the TAM analysis.

4.1. VR Driving Simulator

To evaluate the proposed system, we developed a custom VR driving simulator. The
latter could offer a controlled environment to experiment safely and ensure the repeatability
of the simulation conditions [23,24]. The simulator accommodates a full-scale Mercedes
A-Class 2003 car model, which was encapsulated in a Cave Automatic Virtual Environment
(CAVE) room, as illustrated in Figure 7. The CAVE produces a fully immersive experience
with 3D high-deﬁnition projections on all the surrounding walls. The simulator’s interior
was rebuilt to facilitate the testing of vehicular interfaces.

In addition, the simulator interior is equipped and customisable with different types
and positions of touchscreens for the simulation of various HDD infotainment systems.
The dashboard instrumentation presents fully functional, digital versions, of a tachometer

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

11 of 28

and speedometer. For the particular experiment, a Leap Motion sensor positioned on the
top of the dashboard instrumentation hub for the facilitation of the gesture recognition. A
5.1 surround audio system ensures that the driver experiences the environmental noises
as well as the engine, gearbox, tyres, and any other related sound during the simulation.
Furthermore, the vehicular ﬂoor houses a set of vibrating devices providing realistic engine,
road and collision vibrations.

The simulation software records for each user trial, the collisions occurred, the driver’s
speed, the simulation elapsed time, the lane position, the distance from the lead vehicle, and
the neighbouring vehicles every 0.03 s. The derived results are automatically calculated and
present the driver’s response times (RT) and headway (HW) during an imminent collision.
As the simulation was not ending at the ﬁrst collision, the number of collisions per
user-trial was also logged. Additionally, the recording of the manoeuvring choices of each
driver sketches a clear view of the driving patterns that emerge and the usability of the
system under evaluation.

Figure 7. Explanatory image of the VR driving simulator laboratory (VRDS Lab) set up.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 29   Figure 7. Explanatory image of the VR driving simulator laboratory (VRDS Lab) set up. The vehicle interior accommodated the HDD in the form of a lower touchscreen (smart tablet) positioned in the existing screen-space that the manufacturer has provided for such systems which are located in the middle section of the dashboard in relatively close proximity to the user’s extended arm and approximately 720–880 mm from the driver’s eyes [14,23]. Evaluation of multiple potential positions has been performed in-depth and results indicate that the following order, F, C, A, D, B, G, and E are the best to worst options as illustrated in Figure 8 [46]. The selected HDD position, the upper part of the cluster/dash-board (C), used in this experiment, is the second-best position following the HUD pro-jected in front to the driver’s field of view (FOV) [46]. Notably, any other HDD position results in worse results for the HDD users as presented in previous studies [46–48]. In particular, this work compares the best possible HDD position (C) against the proposed HUD (F) which occupies a typical HUD space in the windscreen and appears to be em-bedded in the environment. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

12 of 28

The vehicle interior accommodated the HDD in the form of a lower touchscreen
(smart tablet) positioned in the existing screen-space that the manufacturer has provided
for such systems which are located in the middle section of the dashboard in relatively close
proximity to the user’s extended arm and approximately 720–880 mm from the driver’s
eyes [14,23].

Evaluation of multiple potential positions has been performed in-depth and results
indicate that the following order, F, C, A, D, B, G, and E are the best to worst options as illus-
trated in Figure 8 [46]. The selected HDD position, the upper part of the cluster/dashboard
(C), used in this experiment, is the second-best position following the HUD projected in
front to the driver’s ﬁeld of view (FOV) [46]. Notably, any other HDD position results in
worse results for the HDD users as presented in previous studies [46–48]. In particular,
this work compares the best possible HDD position (C) against the proposed HUD (F)
which occupies a typical HUD space in the windscreen and appears to be embedded in the
environment.

Figure 8. Diagrammatic representation of the driver’s cockpit and the positions that could accommo-
date a touchscreen. Figure reconstructed from [46].

For the proposed HUD, the AR symbols appear at 2.5 m ahead (bonnet level), ex-
tending further than the vehicle’s bonnet, an improvement from the previous design to
enhance the merging of the information to the external environment and reduce the strain
of driver’s focusing between AR information and exterior scene. This position is also
identiﬁed by other relevant studies as the best position (F) for the projection of a HUD
interface [46,47].

However, the vast majority of infotainment systems are bound to the HDD space and
typically positioned in the spaces D and E of vehicle dashboards. The positioning, size,
and accessibility of the infotainment screens are also dependent on the vehicular interior-
design style of each manufacturer, which can further differentiate between models. Yet,
the inherited positioning issues of the HDDs present a major disadvantage in contrast to
HUD interfaces [2,5,23,46]. Furthermore, the manual type of interaction with the interface

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 29  For the proposed HUD, the AR symbols appear at 2.5 m ahead (bonnet level), ex-tending further than the vehicle’s bonnet, an improvement from the previous design to enhance the merging of the information to the external environment and reduce the strain of driver’s focusing between AR information and exterior scene. This position is also iden-tified by other relevant studies as the best position (F) for the projection of a HUD interface [46,47]. However, the vast majority of infotainment systems are bound to the HDD space and typically positioned in the spaces D and E of vehicle dashboards. The positioning, size, and accessibility of the infotainment screens are also dependent on the vehicular interior-design style of each manufacturer, which can further differentiate between models. Yet, the inherited positioning issues of the HDDs present a major disadvantage in contrast to HUD interfaces [2,5,23,46]. Furthermore, the manual type of interaction with the interface affects further the results as the driver’s manual distraction adds onto the visual and cog-nitive distraction of the position, size, and context of the screens of the HDD [45]. During the experiment, it was observed that every time that driver takes one hand off the steering wheel to interact with the infotainment screens (HDD), this affects the whole body pos-ture, resulting to an unstable positioning and grip of the remaining hand on the steering wheel [46].  Figure 8. Diagrammatic representation of the driver’s cockpit and the positions that could accom-modate a touchscreen. Figure reconstructed from [46]. The interaction with the AR symbols is feasible with a simple gesture, perceived by the Leap Motion device, positioned at the top of the instrumentation hub, behind the steer-ing wheel. This is approximately 500–650 mm from the driver’s head and easily accessible with the driver’s fingertips or minimal arm extension depending on the height and seating position of the driver. Due to the direct approach and interaction with the HUD interface, the driver’s both hands could remain on the steering wheel. This prevents the issue described above, in Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

13 of 28

affects further the results as the driver’s manual distraction adds onto the visual and
cognitive distraction of the position, size, and context of the screens of the HDD [45].
During the experiment, it was observed that every time that driver takes one hand off the
steering wheel to interact with the infotainment screens (HDD), this affects the whole body
posture, resulting to an unstable positioning and grip of the remaining hand on the steering
wheel [46].

The interaction with the AR symbols is feasible with a simple gesture, perceived by the
Leap Motion device, positioned at the top of the instrumentation hub, behind the steering
wheel. This is approximately 500–650 mm from the driver’s head and easily accessible
with the driver’s ﬁngertips or minimal arm extension depending on the height and seating
position of the driver.

Due to the direct approach and interaction with the HUD interface, the driver’s both
hands could remain on the steering wheel. This prevents the issue described above, in
which the driver has to take one hand from the steering wheel and change the body
posture whilst interacting with traditional HDD interfaces. Notably, all the distances
and dimensions are dependent to the driver’s physical dimensions and seating position.
During the user trials, the vast majority of the drivers managed to maintain both hands
on the steering wheel with minor exceptions that the hand was lifted to “air-click” and
AR interface, yet in very close proximity to the steering wheel and without changing the
driver’s body posture and balance as illustrated in Figure 2 [46].

4.2. Digital Twin City and AI

The VR driving simulator follows on previous successful versions designed for this
type of evaluations, yet is improved on graphics realism, artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) of the
computer-controlled vehicles, and the physics ﬁdelity provided [2,15,49]. Typical, driver’s
behavioural patterns were scripted for individual AI vehicles which allowed them to
react and manoeuvre around a user driver [50,51]. This facilitates seamless interaction
between the driver and the suspension of disbelief with regards to the user driver and
also stimulates user concentration as they are forced to react to the actions of the AI-
controlled vehicular agents. The number of AI vehicles and speeds replicated a typical
midday trafﬁc ﬂow during the week. Fluctuations on speed and driving patterns were
incorporated to resemble closely real trafﬁc [50–54]. The driving patterns utilised for
the AI vehicles were provided through consultation with the Strathclyde Trafﬁc Police
department [2,19,50–52]. The particular patterns covered an array of drivers, vehicle types,
and styles appearing on the UK motorways [54]. In addition, the research group retrieved
trafﬁc network information, collision scenarios, and statistics through consultation with the
Road Safety Framework team and Road Safety Policy team within Transport Scotland [53].
Different virtual personas were created for the AI-driven vehicles, reﬂecting the information
provided by the aforementioned organisations.

Additionally, these AI-controlled vehicles would create the conditions to engage the
user in an accident event as described by the local trafﬁc police [2,52]. The latter information
is used to simulate the accident scenarios in the precise position that these typically occur
in the real-city motorways. The arrival of the driver to the accident occurring zone depends
upon previous potential accidents that might occur and the driver’s speed ﬂuctuations.

The current design has several properties which can be conﬁgured to determine the
behaviour of how an AI vehicle travels on the road. These include the speed, the line of
travel, and the variation in the line of travel. Approaching an area that requires a driving
behaviour divergent from what is normally employed, the AI vehicles will react depending
on the proximity and information provided by the trigger area as illustrated in Figure 9.
Within this area, the vehicles attempt to create an abrupt-breaking of the lead AI vehicle
situation which will challenge the user’s response. Prior to some of these challenges, the
user receives mobile phone messages or navigational information that intend to distract
him/her from the main task. A description of the evaluation scenarios is presented in
detail in the following Section 4.3.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

14 of 28

Figure 9. Creation of collision prone scenarios by Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)—controlled vehicles.

To immerse the driver further, a digital twin of the city of Glasgow’s surrounding
motorways has been modelled. The selected routes of M8, M73, and M80 formed a 28 miles
triangle which is the busiest part of the road-network connecting Glasgow to Edinburgh
and Stirling whilst offering the path to the north in Highlands and to the south towards
North England as depicted in Figure 10.

Due to the size and complexity of the area, the team opted to model only the visible
buildings and the landmarks alongside the motorways. For the simulation purposes,
the trafﬁc ﬂow of the digital twin model was asynchronous to replicate the particular
conditions that lead to an accident.

A synchronous version would have been unusable as predetermined events could
not be embedded. As such an instance of the digital twin model representing a typical
ﬂow during daytime was utilised for the experiment. As such, the digital twin city section
offers a multilayered model that entails architectural information, AI trafﬁc ﬂow, road
network, and VANETS simulation data, encapsulating multiple elements that could affect
the mobility on the road network [3,49,52–54]. The asynchronous state of the digital twin
offers the ﬂexibility of embedding and testing one or more scenarios and conditions to
imitate particular real-life events and provide output for prediction models [49,54–57].

Figure 10. Section of the digital twin model of the city of Glasgow used in the VR driving simulator.

For the development of the digital twin 3D model, the aforementioned road net-
work was modelled with a combination of satellite images, photogrammetry, and video-
recordings to provide a photorealistic outcome that could enhance the driver’s immersion

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 29  which the driver has to take one hand from the steering wheel and change the body pos-ture whilst interacting with traditional HDD interfaces. Notably, all the distances and di-mensions are dependent to the driver’s physical dimensions and seating position. During the user trials, the vast majority of the drivers managed to maintain both hands on the steering wheel with minor exceptions that the hand was lifted to “air-click” and AR inter-face, yet in very close proximity to the steering wheel and without changing the driver’s body posture and balance as illustrated in Figure 2 [46]. 4.2. Digital Twin City and AI The VR driving simulator follows on previous successful versions designed for this type of evaluations, yet is improved on graphics realism, artificial intelligence (AI) of the computer-controlled vehicles, and the physics fidelity provided [2,15,49]. Typical, driver’s behavioural patterns were scripted for individual AI vehicles which allowed them to react and manoeuvre around a user driver [50,51]. This facilitates seamless interaction between the driver and the suspension of disbelief with regards to the user driver and also stimu-lates user concentration as they are forced to react to the actions of the AI-controlled ve-hicular agents. The number of AI vehicles and speeds replicated a typical midday traffic flow during the week. Fluctuations on speed and driving patterns were incorporated to resemble closely real traffic [50–54]. The driving patterns utilised for the AI vehicles were provided through consultation with the Strathclyde Traffic Police department [2,19,50–52]. The particular patterns covered an array of drivers, vehicle types, and styles appear-ing on the UK motorways [54]. In addition, the research group retrieved traffic network information, collision scenarios, and statistics through consultation with the Road Safety Framework team and Road Safety Policy team within Transport Scotland [53]. Different virtual personas were created for the AI-driven vehicles, reflecting the information pro-vided by the aforementioned organisations. Additionally, these AI-controlled vehicles would create the conditions to engage the user in an accident event as described by the local traffic police [2,52]. The latter infor-mation is used to simulate the accident scenarios in the precise position that these typically occur in the real-city motorways. The arrival of the driver to the accident occurring zone depends upon previous potential accidents that might occur and the driver’s speed fluc-tuations. The current design has several properties which can be configured to determine the behaviour of how an AI vehicle travels on the road. These include the speed, the line of travel, and the variation in the line of travel. Approaching an area that requires a driving behaviour divergent from what is normally employed, the AI vehicles will react depend-ing on the proximity and information provided by the trigger area as illustrated in Figure 9. Within this area, the vehicles attempt to create an abrupt-breaking of the lead AI vehicle situation which will challenge the user’s response. Prior to some of these challenges, the user receives mobile phone messages or navigational information that intend to distract him/her from the main task. A description of the evaluation scenarios is presented in de-tail in the following Section 4.3.  Figure 9. Creation of collision prone scenarios by Artificial Intelligence (AI)—controlled vehicles. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 29  To immerse the driver further, a digital twin of the city of Glasgow’s surrounding motorways has been modelled. The selected routes of M8, M73, and M80 formed a 28 miles triangle which is the busiest part of the road-network connecting Glasgow to Edin-burgh and Stirling whilst offering the path to the north in Highlands and to the south towards North England as depicted in Figure 10. Due to the size and complexity of the area, the team opted to model only the visible buildings and the landmarks alongside the motorways. For the simulation purposes, the traffic flow of the digital twin model was asynchronous to replicate the particular condi-tions that lead to an accident. A synchronous version would have been unusable as predetermined events could not be embedded. As such an instance of the digital twin model representing a typical flow during daytime was utilised for the experiment. As such, the digital twin city section offers a multilayered model that entails architectural information, AI traffic flow, road network, and VANETS simulation data, encapsulating multiple elements that could affect the mobility on the road network [3,49,52–54]. The asynchronous state of the digital twin offers the flexibility of embedding and testing one or more scenarios and conditions to imitate particular real-life events and provide output for prediction models [49,54–57].  Figure 10. Section of the digital twin model of the city of Glasgow used in the VR driving simulator. For the development of the digital twin 3D model, the aforementioned road network was modelled with a combination of satellite images, photogrammetry, and video-record-ings to provide a photorealistic outcome that could enhance the driver’s immersion as illustrated in Figure 11. To avoid visualising every road extension stemming from the main motorways, the exits were blocked with police cones which were defined as immov-able objects in the simulation. In this way, a continues path of the three connected motor-way sections produced a triangular circuit that kept the drivers from wandering in the neighbouring areas. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

15 of 28

as illustrated in Figure 11. To avoid visualising every road extension stemming from
the main motorways, the exits were blocked with police cones which were deﬁned as
immovable objects in the simulation. In this way, a continues path of the three connected
motorway sections produced a triangular circuit that kept the drivers from wandering in
the neighbouring areas.

Figure 11. Motorway M8 section from Glasgow towards Edinburgh (a) VR digital twin city model screenshot as can be seen
when driving in the VR driving simulator, (b) Google maps’ screenshot of the same spot in real-life.

Other minor approximations were performed to the 3D digital twin model to reduce
the graphics’ computational intensity of the real-time VR simulation. Objects, irrelevant
to the simulation, such as light-poles, pavements, electric station boxes, and other road
furniture, were originally introduced to the simulation scenes but removed as they were
affecting the frame per second performance of the VR environment. Maintaining a mini-
mum of 90 FPS was essential to avoid or reduce the participants’ disorientation, nausea,
and overall motion sickness.

To improve further the immersion of the users to the simulation environment, the
vehicles selected to populate the trafﬁc ﬂow were chosen based on their commonality to
the existing vehicles that are typically encountered in these motorways. Police vehicles,
lorries, and other distinctive vehicles were also used to seamlessly appear in the three
motorways and provide a diverse group of vehicles, to improve the drivers’ familiarisation
and immersion in the VR environment.

4.3. Evaluation Scenario

Evaluation of the proposed HUD system was undertaken though a contrasting com-
parative study between the proposed interface and currently in use systems. Accident
scenarios provided by the Strathclyde Police department to previous simulation experi-
ments [2,18,53,58] formed the basis of the potential accident simulations recreated by the
system and presented to the evaluation participants. By establishing an internal consistency
amongst the various trials with testing the same accident scenarios while utilising different
prototype systems, we ensure a direct correlation between variables altered and evaluation
result output [2,15,43,50].

The simulation deemed most appropriate for this evaluation is one that employs
a rear collision accident scenario. It accesses the driver’s response in high-speed, low
trafﬁc situations (i.e., motorway environment) when distracted with random text messages
which may or may not deviate the driver’s gaze from the road and of the primary task of
driving. A high-propensity collision scenario is created through fundamental AI, which
controls the neighbouring agent-vehicles. The latter, computer-controlled vehicles, follow
seemingly the human-driven vehicle and gradually form potential abrupt braking and
path-blocking conditions following closely the collision patterns provided by the Trafﬁc
Police. In particular, the driver receives messages related to navigation or mobile phone
text messages, in seemingly random intervals. In total, the driver receives four messages,
two for navigation updates and two from mobile texts. The scenario presented to the

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 29   Figure 11. Motorway M8 section from Glasgow towards Edinburgh (a) VR digital twin city model screenshot as can be seen when driving in the VR driving simulator, (b) Google maps’ screenshot of the same spot in real-life. Other minor approximations were performed to the 3D digital twin model to reduce the graphics’ computational intensity of the real-time VR simulation. Objects, irrelevant to the simulation, such as light-poles, pavements, electric station boxes, and other road furniture, were originally introduced to the simulation scenes but removed as they were affecting the frame per second performance of the VR environment. Maintaining a mini-mum of 90 FPS was essential to avoid or reduce the participants’ disorientation, nausea, and overall motion sickness. To improve further the immersion of the users to the simulation environment, the vehicles selected to populate the traffic flow were chosen based on their commonality to the existing vehicles that are typically encountered in these motorways. Police vehicles, lorries, and other distinctive vehicles were also used to seamlessly appear in the three motorways and provide a diverse group of vehicles, to improve the drivers’ familiarisa-tion and immersion in the VR environment. 4.3. Evaluation Scenario Evaluation of the proposed HUD system was undertaken though a contrasting com-parative study between the proposed interface and currently in use systems. Accident scenarios provided by the Strathclyde Police department to previous simulation experi-ments [2,18,53,58] formed the basis of the potential accident simulations recreated by the system and presented to the evaluation participants. By establishing an internal con-sistency amongst the various trials with testing the same accident scenarios while utilising different prototype systems, we ensure a direct correlation between variables altered and evaluation result output [2,15,43,50]. The simulation deemed most appropriate for this evaluation is one that employs a rear collision accident scenario. It accesses the driver’s response in high-speed, low traffic situations (i.e., motorway environment) when distracted with random text messages which may or may not deviate the driver’s gaze from the road and of the primary task of driving. A high-propensity collision scenario is created through fundamental AI, which controls the neighbouring agent-vehicles. The latter, computer-controlled vehicles, follow seemingly the human-driven vehicle and gradually form potential abrupt braking and path-blocking conditions following closely the collision patterns provided by the Traffic Police. In particular, the driver receives messages related to navigation or mobile phone text messages, in seemingly random intervals. In total, the driver receives four messages, two for navigation updates and two from mobile texts. The scenario presented to the users follows a storyline in which the driver is invited to meet friends in a location nearby Ed-inburgh. In this way, the user has to check the incoming navigation and text messages’ trail to guide him/her to the meeting location. For the scenario version that utilises the typical HDD, the infotainment messages are presented on a tablet device positioned in the middle of the vehicle dashboard. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

16 of 28

users follows a storyline in which the driver is invited to meet friends in a location nearby
Edinburgh. In this way, the user has to check the incoming navigation and text messages’
trail to guide him/her to the meeting location.

For the scenario version that utilises the typical HDD, the infotainment messages are

presented on a tablet device positioned in the middle of the vehicle dashboard.

On the second round of the experiment, the same text information is presented to the
driver through the proposed AR HUD. As mentioned above, the order of the simulation
runs with HDD and HUD was changed randomly for each user. In both cases, the requested
task is to access and read the incoming messages from mobile phone communication and
navigation updates, while driving, assuming that they feel safe to do this.

The driver is intentionally enticed to interact with the incoming infotainment data as
stated above by replicating a typical routine for the vast majority of the drivers with the
HDD infotainment systems or with the actual mobile phone.

As the simulation progresses, the division of the driver’s attention secondary to the
external stimulus (i.e., text message and/or navigation message) creates a situation of a
potential imminent collision. In a short interval after receiving the message, a rear collision
scenario is unfolding; as the lead vehicle, every time is performing an abrupt braking
or full-stop braking [50,59]. The latter is appearing on a seemingly random part of the
simulation as a trafﬁc jam is blocking the road ahead, in order to minimise the likelihood
of the user memorising the events. In such a situation, the driver has three potential
options, mainly related to his response time from noticing the external event, namely:
break abruptly and avoid a collision, collide or circumvent the lead obstructing vehicle,
and try to perform a full-stop without collision.

The simulation software measures the said driver’s response by calculating the re-
sponse time (RT) and collision occurrence frequency in both simulation scenarios (with or
without the HUD interface). These data contribute to the ﬁnal evaluation, in combination
with the subjective feedback from drivers collected via a pre and post-trial questionnaire
as presented succinctly above. Drivers are also invited to voice their overall impression,
thoughts, and suggestions post-evaluation experiment in a debrieﬁng session with the
researchers.

4.4. Participants

The results presented below are derived by the user-trials of 30 drivers (9 female,
21 male participants) which held a valid driving license, and they were aged between 20
and 66 years old. The simulation and the computer-controlled vehicles were programmed
to comply with the driving rules and regulations of the British Highway Code.

5. Evaluation Results and Discussion
5.1. Collision Occurred HUD vs. HDD

The comparative study between HDD and HUD aimed to identify the beneﬁts and
the potential drawbacks of both systems and with a particular interest in the efﬁciency of
information access and provision of the proposed system. The collision results offer a clear
and concise manner of revealing the aforementioned. The derived collision occurrence
results of this comparison are presented in detail in Figure 12.

Notably, the use of traditional touchscreens positioned within the dashboard estate
(HDD) presented 87% collision occurrences. In contrast, when the HUD system was
deployed, a sharp decrease of 64% in collisions was observed, whereby only 23% of
participants experienced a collision in the simulated accident scenario.

Beyond the duality of a positive and negative result of the collision occurrences, it was
observed that each user had a different number of collisions throughout the simulation
until the simulation events were completed.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

17 of 28

Figure 12. Number of collisions recorded with HDD vs. HUD interface.

The number of collisions per trial is indicative of the amount of driver’s distraction
while attempting to circumvent the trafﬁc and respond to the different incoming infor-
mation as illustrated in Figure 13. Notably, the simulation was not terminated in the ﬁrst
collision, but the driver was allowed to continue the simulation until he/she reached the
main collision event. Yet, throughout the simulation, the driver was tested and challenged
by the AI-controlled vehicles which created mini-collision collision conditions which tested
the driver’s capability to respond and maintain the focus on the driving task. The drivers
that were preoccupied with the interior infotainment systems tended to collide multiple
times before the main collision event.

Additionally, the timing of the accidents and the intensity of collisions could reveal
the exact moment that each user experienced a cognitive overload and the time required to
respond and attempt to amend the vehicle speed and lane positioning. Further observation
of the driving patterns indicates that 6.5% of the users had no collisions with and without
a HUD.

However, on the post-trial debrieﬁng, they highlighted that although they managed to
avoid collisions, they felt more relaxed to operate the HUD system in contrast to the HDD,
which required additional effort. Furthermore, the HDD arm of the simulation entailed in
total 127 collisions amongst 26 participants, in comparison to the HUD which produced
only 15 collisions between 7 users. As such, their driving pattern with the HUD did not
present any erratic behaviour such as observed with the HDD in which they had to perform
abrupt braking or lane change to avoid an imminent collision.

Only 3% of the participants’ sample (1 user), performed worst with the HUD interface,

although experienced collisions in both simulations, with and without the HUD.

The particular user found it difﬁcult to operate the HUD interface and access the
incoming data primarily due to the user’s preferred seating position that prevented the
operation within the active area of Leap Motion.

A statistical analysis of the collision occurrences results presented previously in
Figure 8 suggests that the HUD system offers a higher probability of collision avoidance
with a conﬁdence interval of 95%. The collision occurrences results were extrapolated from
the 30 participants sample to the overall population of drivers with the use of large sample
conﬁdence interval (CI) for the population mean.

The results were calculated with the conﬁdence of 95%, which suggests a margin
of 5% of potential error that is acceptable for the nature of this evaluation. The analysis
highlighted that drivers have a probability of average 87% (1.00–0.74) to collide when
they use the HDD for a mobile-phone messaging system and navigation updates on the

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 29   Figure 12. Number of collisions recorded with HDD vs. HUD interface. Notably, the use of traditional touchscreens positioned within the dashboard estate (HDD) presented 87% collision occurrences. In contrast, when the HUD system was de-ployed, a sharp decrease of 64% in collisions was observed, whereby only 23% of partici-pants experienced a collision in the simulated accident scenario. Beyond the duality of a positive and negative result of the collision occurrences, it was observed that each user had a different number of collisions throughout the simula-tion until the simulation events were completed. The number of collisions per trial is indicative of the amount of driver’s distraction while attempting to circumvent the traffic and respond to the different incoming infor-mation as illustrated in Figure 13. Notably, the simulation was not terminated in the first collision, but the driver was allowed to continue the simulation until he/she reached the main collision event. Yet, throughout the simulation, the driver was tested and challenged by the AI-controlled vehicles which created mini-collision collision conditions which tested the driver’s capability to respond and maintain the focus on the driving task. The drivers that were preoccupied with the interior infotainment systems tended to collide multiple times before the main collision event. Additionally, the timing of the accidents and the intensity of collisions could reveal the exact moment that each user experienced a cognitive overload and the time required to respond and attempt to amend the vehicle speed and lane positioning. Further obser-vation of the driving patterns indicates that 6.5% of the users had no collisions with and without a HUD. However, on the post-trial debriefing, they highlighted that although they managed to avoid collisions, they felt more relaxed to operate the HUD system in contrast to the HDD, which required additional effort. Furthermore, the HDD arm of the simulation en-tailed in total 127 collisions amongst 26 participants, in comparison to the HUD which produced only 15 collisions between 7 users. As such, their driving pattern with the HUD did not present any erratic behaviour such as observed with the HDD in which they had to perform abrupt braking or lane change to avoid an imminent collision. Only 3% of the participants’ sample (1 user), performed worst with the HUD inter-face, although experienced collisions in both simulations, with and without the HUD. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

18 of 28

aforementioned driving scenario as presented in Table 1 and Figure 14. This is an alarming
percentage which can be conﬁrmed by the real-life collisions typically occurring and
attributed to these factors.

This was sharply decreased to 23% (0.39–0.07) when the proposed HUD interface was
utilised as a guidance system in the same conditions, as presented in Figure 12. Overall, the
proposed AR HUD system in conjunction with the direct manipulation gesture interface
provided a safer provision of the infotainment information, reduced the driver’s anxiety,
and ultimately contributed signiﬁcantly in the reduction of collisions caused by driver’s
inattention to the main task.

Figure 13. Number of collisions per user with and without the HUD (1–30). Upper image contains
1–15 users and the lower image contains 16–30 users.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 29    Figure 13. Number of collisions per user with and without the HUD (1–30). Upper image contains 1–15 users and the lower image contains 16–30 users. The particular user found it difficult to operate the HUD interface and access the in-coming data primarily due to the user’s preferred seating position that prevented the op-eration within the active area of Leap Motion. A statistical analysis of the collision occurrences results presented previously in Fig-ure 8 suggests that the HUD system offers a higher probability of collision avoidance with a confidence interval of 95%. The collision occurrences results were extrapolated from the 30 participants sample to the overall population of drivers with the use of large sample confidence interval (CI) for the population mean. The results were calculated with the confidence of 95%, which suggests a margin of 5% of potential error that is acceptable for the nature of this evaluation. The analysis high-lighted that drivers have a probability of average 87% (1.00–0.74) to collide when they use the HDD for a mobile-phone messaging system and navigation updates on the aforemen-tioned driving scenario as presented in Table 1 and Figure 14. This is an alarming percent-age which can be confirmed by the real-life collisions typically occurring and attributed to these factors.   Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

19 of 28

Figure 14. User experience results regarding the ease of use for the HUD interface.

Table 1. Probability of collision occurrences for HDD and HUD with CI 95%.

HDD

CI n = (30) x = (26) c = (0.95)

Collisions with HDD

Mean

95% CI for Mean

Lower Bound

Upper Bound

5% Trimmed Mean

Variance

Standard Deviation

HUD

CI n = (30) x = (7) c = (0.95)

Collisions with HUD

Mean

95% CI for Mean

Lower Bound

Upper Bound

5% Trimmed Mean

Variance

Standard Deviation

0.87

0.74

1.00

0.83

0.120

0.346

0.23

0.07

0.39

0.20

0.185

0.430

5.2. Indicative Driving Patterns-Discussion

Four indicative driving patterns are presented based on the collision occurrences
with the HUD and HDD devices. In particular, these include (A) collision with HUD and
with HDD, (B) no collisions with HUD and no collisions with HDD, (C) large number of
collisions with the use of HDD, and (D) no collisions with HUD and collisions with HDD,
which was the result of the largest group in the experiment as presented in Figure 15.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 20 of 29  Table 1. Probability of collision occurrences for HDD and HUD with CI 95%. HDD CI n = (30) x = (26) c = (0.95)  Collisions with HDD Mean 0.87 95% CI for Mean Lower Bound 0.74 Upper Bound 1.00 5% Trimmed Mean 0.83 Variance 0.120 Standard Deviation 0.346 HUD CI n = (30) x = (7) c = (0.95)  Collisions with HUD Mean 0.23 95% CI for Mean Lower Bound 0.07 Upper Bound 0.39 5% Trimmed Mean 0.20 Variance 0.185 Standard Deviation 0.430  Figure 14. User experience results regarding the ease of use for the HUD interface. This was sharply decreased to 23% (0.39–0.07) when the proposed HUD interface was utilised as a guidance system in the same conditions, as presented in Figure 12. Overall, the proposed AR HUD system in conjunction with the direct manipulation gesture inter-face provided a safer provision of the infotainment information, reduced the driver’s anx-iety, and ultimately contributed significantly in the reduction of collisions caused by driver’s inattention to the main task. 5.2. Indicative Driving Patterns-Discussion Four indicative driving patterns are presented based on the collision occurrences with the HUD and HDD devices. In particular, these include (A) collision with HUD and with HDD, (B) no collisions with HUD and no collisions with HDD, (C) large number of collisions with the use of HDD, and (D) no collisions with HUD and collisions with HDD, which was the result of the largest group in the experiment as presented in Figure 15. Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

20 of 28

Figure 15. Four indicative driving patterns deﬁned by the collisions occurred with the use of HUD and HDD: (A) collision
with HUD and with HDD, (B) no collisions with HUD and no collisions with HDD, (C) large number of collisions with the
use of HDD, and (D) no collisions with HUD and collisions with HDD.

The ﬁrst set of graphs (Figure 15A) highlights some driver responses which have been
similar to both HDD and HUD devices and resulted in both cases in collisions. The ﬁve
users of this category produced an equal amount of HUD and HDD collisions (2 users)
and in some cases a higher number of collisions with the use of HUD (3 users). This can be
attributed to a number of potential issues or combination of issues related to the simulation
environment (i.e., seating position), the driver (i.e., height), and lack of familiarisation with
the new system amongst other. Further, it could reﬂect the cognitive load that for some
users is similar for both systems. Additionally, the interface design or interaction could not

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 21 of 29   Figure 15. Four indicative driving patterns defined by the collisions occurred with the use of HUD and HDD: (A) collision with HUD and with HDD, (B) no collisions with HUD and no collisions with HDD, (C) large number of collisions with the use of HDD, and (D) no collisions with HUD and collisions with HDD. The first set of graphs (Figure 15A) highlights some driver responses which have been similar to both HDD and HUD devices and resulted in both cases in collisions. The five users of this category produced an equal amount of HUD and HDD collisions (2 us-ers) and in some cases a higher number of collisions with the use of HUD (3 users). This can be attributed to a number of potential issues or combination of issues related to the simulation environment (i.e., seating position), the driver (i.e., height), and lack of famil-iarisation with the new system amongst other. Further, it could reflect the cognitive load Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

21 of 28

be intuitive for some users. Although it is expected that a system could not facilitate all
the users, it would be interesting to investigate further the reasons and identify potential
solutions that could enable more users to operate the proposed system.

The following graph (Figure 15B) presents another group of four users who managed
to avoid all the potential collisions whilst operating the HDD or the HUD. Their driving
patterns followed closely the response of the lead vehicles and manoeuvred appropriately
or decelerated without getting involved in any of the accident scenarios developed by the
AI-controlled vehicles. In contrast, ﬁve users were involved in more than 10 accidents
each while they were using the HDD infotainment system. One of the users had also one
collision with the HUD. The high number of collisions highlights the detrimental effects
for some users when they split their attention and take their eyes off the road. Interestingly
the rest of them had no collisions with the HUD.

Investigating further the driving patterns that appeared on the simulation, an indica-

tive common user reaction (16 users) is presented in the graphs of Figure 15D.

Focusing into the last few seconds of the ﬁnal collision of the driver D the following
two graphs (Figure 16a,b) present the users’ (a) speed vs. time and (b) distance from
the lead vehicle vs. time. In particular, the Figure 16a graph shows the user’s vehicle
speed (Km/h) and the time travelled (s) prior to the imminent collision scenario with the
lead vehicle.

Figure 16. Driver reactions on the last 13 s of the simulation. (a) Vehicle speed (Km/h) over time (s),
(b) Distance (m) from the leading vehicle over time (s).

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 22 of 29  that for some users is similar for both systems. Additionally, the interface design or inter-action could not be intuitive for some users. Although it is expected that a system could not facilitate all the users, it would be interesting to investigate further the reasons and identify potential solutions that could enable more users to operate the proposed system. The following graph (Figure 15B) presents another group of four users who managed to avoid all the potential collisions whilst operating the HDD or the HUD. Their driving patterns followed closely the response of the lead vehicles and manoeuvred appropriately or decelerated without getting involved in any of the accident scenarios developed by the AI-controlled vehicles. In contrast, five users were involved in more than 10 accidents each while they were using the HDD infotainment system. One of the users had also one collision with the HUD. The high number of collisions highlights the detrimental effects for some users when they split their attention and take their eyes off the road. Interestingly the rest of them had no collisions with the HUD. Investigating further the driving patterns that appeared on the simulation, an indic-ative common user reaction (16 users) is presented in the graphs of Figure 15D. Focusing into the last few seconds of the final collision of the driver D the following two graphs (Figure 16a,b) present the users’ (a) speed vs. time and (b) distance from the lead vehicle vs. time. In particular, the Figure 16a graph shows the user’s vehicle speed (Km/h) and the time travelled (s) prior to the imminent collision scenario with the lead vehicle.   Figure 16. Driver reactions on the last 13 s of the simulation. (a) Vehicle speed (Km/h) over time (s), (b) Distance (m) from the leading vehicle over time (s). Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

22 of 28

Notably, the lead vehicle is braking abruptly behind immobile trafﬁc. The user is
challenged to respond quickly and avoid the collision. However, during the overall
simulation, the driver is receiving four messages at different intervals, related to navigation
and mobile phone texts activity. Two of the four messages are related to navigation updates
and in particular, the ﬁrst two messages, related to navigation, alert the driver for potential
dense trafﬁc ahead and delays appearing in the following sections of the motorway. The
last two are mobile-phone text messages related to a social event. The context presents
small variations between the two simulations. The sequence of the messages changes
randomly between the simulations.

This scenario is repeated randomly for each system (i.e., HUD and HDD). The user
illustrated in Figure 16a,b drove the simulation with the HUD ﬁrst and in turn with the
HDD. The two grey sections in both graphs indicate the last event in which the driver
receives the fourth message, and at the same time, the lead vehicle performs a sudden
brake to avoid collision with the trafﬁc jam ahead. In Figure 16a, the user drives close
to the motorway upper-speed limit (70 mph/112 Km/h) with reasonable ﬂuctuations in
speed. When the user receives some information through the HUD, he is braking lightly to
interact with the HUD, as can be seen by the two small peaks in the graph just before 5 s
and marginally after 9 s.

Yet, the user does not change the speed abruptly or swerve between lanes as he can
see at the same time the external environment and the braking vehicle ahead. Notably, the
user through the HUD managed to read the previous brief navigation warnings regarding
the trafﬁc jam ahead. Anticipating such issue, the user slows down from the top legal
speed gradually and reaches on a full stop behind the trafﬁc on 11.5 s. He starts driving
again as the trafﬁc is resolved.

In contrast, when the user is trying to access the information from the HDD, is
struggling to read some of the messages and the driving speed pattern becomes erratic,
presenting abrupt deceleration and acceleration as illustrated by the red line of the same
graph in Figure 15b. In addition, being unable to read the navigation warnings, the user
maintains a fast pace of driving. On the ﬁnal message, it can be observed that the driver
is trying to access the information looking and interacting with the HDD device. The
following 2 s the driver realises that he is in a direct course to collision and attempts a
full brake unsuccessfully, resulting in a rear collision at 72 Km/h with a stationary lead
vehicle. Such collisions are severe and frequently fatal or resulting in debilitating injuries
of both vehicles’ occupants. Interestingly, the driver with the use of the HDD maintained
higher speed and reached the event area in a shorter period of time and unable to access
the navigation warnings safely, met the trafﬁc 7 s earlier that with the use of the HUD.

Further driving patterns that appeared are presented in Figure 16b, illustrating the
distance (m) from the lead vehicle in correlation to the time (s) driven prior to the collision
event. The last 200 m separating the driver’s vehicle from the lead vehicle is reduced
rapidly, in less than 5 s while the driver is preoccupied with the HDD interaction, resulting
in a major collision. In contrast, while the driver is using the AR projected information
of the proposed HUD, the vehicle’s distance from the stopped lead vehicle is plotted as a
gradual curve, reaching a full stop approximately 40 m behind the immobile trafﬁc.

The aforementioned ﬁndings relate to less stressful driving with the use of HUD,
as advocated by 97% participants, and are in accordance with the ﬁndings of previous
experiments that utilised prototype HUD systems to alleviate the driver’s cognitive load
and reduce driver’s distraction [2,14,47].

5.3. HUD Ease of Use

The post-questionnaire ﬁndings regarding the ease of use and the familiarisation time
required for the prototype HUD system are conﬁrming the aforementioned observations
(Figures 12 and 13) and subjective feedback. To this end, a promising response from 80% of
the participants found it either extremely easy or very easy to get accustomed to the HUD
interface and interactivity as shown in Figure 17.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

23 of 28

Figure 17. User experience results regarding the ease of use for the HUD interface.

5.4. System Overview and Limitations

The evaluation of the proposed system offered encouraging results and an indicative
appraisal of users’ acceptance of the prototype AR-HUD system. The aforementioned
results suggest that the combination of AR HUD and gesture recognition offered a viable
alternative to current in-vehicle interfaces for infotainment systems. The selection of the
HUD as a conduit of the provision of visual information to the driver and its position-
ing conﬁrmed previous and concurrent research studies in the ﬁeld [2,24,26–28,58]. The
study’s results both on user performance and on system acceptability, as presented in
previous sections, are concordant with published ﬁndings. The collisions occurrences
results, in particular, resembled closely previous experiments that utilised HUD interfaces
and contrasted them against typical HDD devices [2,3,58,60,61].

Coupling the latter with a gesture recognition interface design, following the same
design mantra, enabled the users to perform the selected and speciﬁc tasks without compli-
cated multilayered interfaces. As per previous studies, uncomplicated gesture recognition
systems could be utilised instead of typical manual or voice-controlled interfaces that
tend to distract the driver by taking the eyes off the road [29,32–34,62–65]. Yet, several
limitations hindered the research process as presented below.

The position and size of the current HUD–UI is ﬁxed and allows no modiﬁcations. This
limits the usability of the system as the drivers had to modify the position of their seat as
to see clearly and operate the AR HUD. The addition of the customisable size and position
of the HUD would likely enhance the proposed system’s usability and driving experience
of the driver. This limitation could have potentially affected some of the simulation results.
As presented in the “Simulation Requirements” section, the development of a full-
scale VR driving simulator carries a considerable cost. The reduction of the cost wherever
possible dictated the utilisation of off-the-shelf equipment which had to be installed retro-
spectively in the vehicle’s interior. Hardware devices employed for the simulation such
as the Leap Motion are commercially available computing equipment/peripherals and
they are not designed for immediate use in other domains. This was evident during the
simulation, as some users with larger hands found it difﬁcult to pin-point and select the
different UI options, as revealed in the post-evaluation questionnaire. Furthermore, the
aforementioned device’s usability has not been tested in a real-life vehicle. In its current
form, it is unclear if it is suitable for a vehicle in motion.

Another measuring element that intentionally has not been employed was the eye-
tracking of the users, typically utilised to identify their gaze position and time during the
simulations. Although eye-tracking is available in the VRDS laboratory, it was deemed
unusable for two reasons.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 24 of 29   Figure 17. User experience results regarding the ease of use for the HUD interface. 5.4. System Overview and Limitations The evaluation of the proposed system offered encouraging results and an indicative appraisal of users’ acceptance of the prototype AR-HUD system. The aforementioned re-sults suggest that the combination of AR HUD and gesture recognition offered a viable alternative to current in-vehicle interfaces for infotainment systems. The selection of the HUD as a conduit of the provision of visual information to the driver and its positioning confirmed previous and concurrent research studies in the field [2,24,26–28,58]. The study’s results both on user performance and on system acceptability, as presented in pre-vious sections, are concordant with published findings. The collisions occurrences results, in particular, resembled closely previous experiments that utilised HUD interfaces and contrasted them against typical HDD devices [2,3,58,60,61]. Coupling the latter with a gesture recognition interface design, following the same design mantra, enabled the users to perform the selected and specific tasks without com-plicated multilayered interfaces. As per previous studies, uncomplicated gesture recogni-tion systems could be utilised instead of typical manual or voice-controlled interfaces that tend to distract the driver by taking the eyes off the road [29,32–34,62–65]. Yet, several limitations hindered the research process as presented below. The position and size of the current HUD–UI is fixed and allows no modifications. This limits the usability of the system as the drivers had to modify the position of their seat as to see clearly and operate the AR HUD. The addition of the customisable size and position of the HUD would likely enhance the proposed system’s usability and driving experience of the driver. This limitation could have potentially affected some of the sim-ulation results. As presented in the “Simulation Requirements” section, the development of a full-scale VR driving simulator carries a considerable cost. The reduction of the cost wherever possible dictated the utilisation of off-the-shelf equipment which had to be installed ret-rospectively in the vehicle’s interior. Hardware devices employed for the simulation such as the Leap Motion are commercially available computing equipment/peripherals and they are not designed for immediate use in other domains. This was evident during the simulation, as some users with larger hands found it difficult to pin-point and select the different UI options, as revealed in the post-evaluation questionnaire. Furthermore, the aforementioned device’s usability has not been tested in a real-life vehicle. In its current form, it is unclear if it is suitable for a vehicle in motion. Another measuring element that intentionally has not been employed was the eye-tracking of the users, typically utilised to identify their gaze position and time during the Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

24 of 28

The ﬁrst one stems from our previous attempts, which presented major issues with
the users’ acceptability and the performance of the tracking equipment. In particular, as
the driver gazes between the road in the VR environment (i.e., layer 1) and the AR HUD
interface (i.e., layer 2), the eye-tracking system was not able to distinguish between the two
layers. The reason is that the proposed HUD interface is projected at 2.5 m ahead of the
windshield to blend with the external environment and avoid double accommodation of
the driver’s gaze as mentioned previously [2,24]. Eye-tracking could have been used in
the cases of typical small-size HUD interfaces that they tend to appear at the same level
or in close proximity behind the windscreen depending on the projection system, HUD
device, and glass combiner used [2,24,58,60,65]. The alternative of head-mounted display
(HMD) eye-trackers was also deemed unusable as were uncomfortable for the users and
distorted their performance and subjective feedback during focus group trials. To resolve
the above issue, video recordings were used to track the drivers’ eye-gaze, head position,
and body posture, yet the derived information was not included in the analysis, as not all
the drivers consented to be recorded, introducing confounders. A large number of users
could alleviate this issue in future evaluations.

The second reason is that a driver’s attention is not necessarily where his/her eyes are
gazing. Various objects (in-vehicle and externally), events, or thoughts could distract the
driver whilst he/she phenomenically gaze in the right direction. As such, it remains unclear
the potential impact of the driver’s attention captured by the HUD interface, namely
percent road centre (PRC) which could affect the driver’s response times (RTs) [65,66].
Although in the particular motorway scenarios and the current AR HUD system, the PRC
might have a negligible effect to the driver, in an urban environment the multilateral
movement and positioning of pedestrians, crossings, could increase the PRC with direct
impact on driver’s and surrounding road users’ safety. Thus, the interface is primarily
designed and tested for motorway driving and performing to the requirements of an urban
environment was outwith the remit of the current investigation but remains within our
future development plans.

The collision avoidance braking and manoeuvring performed by the user in the
evaluation provided a suggestive appraisal of their actual ability to focus on the driving
task manifested by the reduced collisions. Yet, some of these responses could have been
instinctively performed. Detection response tasks (DRT) could be introduced seemingly on
the following evaluations to check, at frequent intervals, the driver’s actual attention on
the road [67,68].

The driving simulation investigated the driver’s behaviour with and without the
proposed system, on a typical British motorway environment and simulated speciﬁc
accident scenarios as provided by the local trafﬁc police. As stated previously, the digital
twin model of the city of Glasgow and the extended motorway network had to be optimised
to facilitate optimal software and hardware performance. Additionally, the neighbouring
vehicles’ AI offers limited driving behaviour which is developed primarily to fulﬁl the
trafﬁc ﬂow needs and the speciﬁc accident scenarios’ formation. Additional characteristics
could be included to challenge further driver’s ability to respond. Finally, the number
of users (30), although sufﬁcient to provide statistically signiﬁcant results and in par to
similar studies [2,25,50,51,62], could be increased in the future to improve the accuracy of
the results and acquire a better understanding of driver’s future requirements related to
the incorporation of emerging technologies in the daily vehicular environment.

6. Conclusions

This paper presented the design and implementation challenges of our prototype mul-
timodal HUD interface that aims to reduce the number of attention-seeking infotainment
interfaces and improve the response time and situational awareness of the driver. This
was achieved with the development of a prototype AR HUD interface that presents a fresh
approach which combines the visual presentation of relevant information through the car’s

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

25 of 28

windshield whilst enabling the driver to interact with the system in real-time through a
novel gesture recognition system.

For the evaluation of the system, we have developed a high-ﬁdelity full-scale driving
simulator that replicated realistically two driving scenarios of high probability collision.
The system has been preliminarily evaluated by 30 users with promising results, demon-
strating 64% improvement in collision avoidance as the users maintained the eye gaze on
the road and their hands on the steering wheel at all times.

Additionally, this work presented an insight into the average driving responses and
offered justiﬁcation for the merits of such systems. The data analysis showed encouraging
results, providing the basis for further research and development in the area of AR and
gesture recognition interfaces for vehicular purposes.

Adhering to the above, our tentative plan of future work entails the streamlining
of interface functionality and gesture recognition with a subsequent increase of user-
trials number to reﬁne the granularity of results and offer more conclusive outcomes.
Furthermore, we aim to introduce additional visual icons and experiment further with the
gesture interaction of multiple infotainment sources. Finally, we plan to engage more the
co-driver, who can operate non-crucial infotainment data which in turn could be shared or
presented to the driver safely.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, V.C., R.L.; methodology, V.C., R.L., J.F. and S.K.; software,
V.C., R.L., S.K., S.W., K.B.L. and D.D.; validation, V.C., R.L., J.F., and D.D.; formal analysis, R.L.,
J.F., S.F.M.A., and S.A.; investigation, R.L., V.C., S.K.; resources, R.L., V.C.; data curation, V.C., R.L.;
writing—original draft preparation, R.L., V.C.; writing—review and editing, V.C., S.A., S.W., K.B.L.
and S.F.M.A.; visualization, R.L., S.W., S.K., K.B.L., V.C.; supervision, V.C., S.K. and D.D.; project
administration, V.C., S.K.; funding acquisition, V.C., R.L., and S.K. All authors have read and agreed
to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research received no external funding.

Data Availability Statement: All the data was anonimised and no personal data or identiﬁers were
recorded.

Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Warren Chan for his invaluable support in the
development of the VR Driving Simulator.

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

4.

5.

2.

3.

1. Merenda, C.; Kim, H.; Tanous, K.; Gabbard, J.L.; Feichtl, B.; Misu, T.; Suga, C. Augmented Reality Interface Design Approaches
for Goal-directed and Stimulus-driven Driving Tasks. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 2018, 24, 2875–2885. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Charissis, V.; Papanastasiou, S. Human-machine collaboration through vehicle head-up display interface. Cogn. Technol. Work
2010, 12, 41–50. [CrossRef]
Charissis, V.; Papanastasiou, S.; Chan, W.; Peytchev, E. Evolution of a full-windshield HUD designed for current VANET
communication standards. In Proceedings of the 16th International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC),
The Hague, The Netherlands, 6–9 October 2013; pp. 1637–1643.
Liao, Y.; Li, G.; Eben, S.; Cheng, B.; Green, P. Understanding Driver Response Patterns to Mental Workload Increase in Typical
Driving Scenarios. IEEE Access 2018, 6, 35890–35900. [CrossRef]
Lagoo, R.; Charissis, V.; Chan, W.; Khan, S.; Harrison, D. Prototype gesture recognition interface for a vehicular head-up display
system. In Proceedings of the 36th IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 12–15
January 2018; pp. 1–6.
Coley, G.; Wesley, A.; Reed, N.; Parry, I. Driver Reaction Times to Familiar but Unexpected Events; Published Project Report (PPR 313);
Transport Research Laboratory (TRL); HIS: Berkshire, UK, 2008; ISBN 9781846089206.
Basacik, D.; Reed, N.; Robbins, R. Smartphone Use while Driving: A Simulator Study; Published Project Report (PPR 592); Transport
Research Laboratory (TRL); HIS: Berkshire, UK, 2012; ISBN 9781846089954.
Reed, N.; Robbins, R. The Effects of Text Messaging on Driver Behaviour: A Simulator Study; Published Project Report (PPR 367);
Transport Research Laboratory (TRL); HIS: Berkshire, UK, 2008; ISBN 9781846087523.
Rohl, A.; Eriksson, S.; Metcalf, D. Evaluating the effectiveness of a front windshield sticker reminder in reducing texting while
driving in young adults. Cureus 2016, 8, e691. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

6.

7.

8.

9.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

26 of 28

10. Dews, F.A.; Stayer, D.L. Cellular phones and driver distraction. In Driver Distraction Theory, Effects and Mitigation; Regan, M.A.,

11.

Lee, J.D., Young, K.L., Eds.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 2009; pp. 169–190.
Simons, S.M.; Hicks, A.; Caird, J.K. Safety-critical event risk associated with cell phone tasks as measured in naturalistic driving
studies: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Accid. Anal. Prev. J. 2016, 87, 161–169. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

12. Morris, A.; Reed, S.; Welsh, R.; Brown, L.; Birrell, S. Distraction effects of navigation and green-driving systems—Results from

ﬁeld operational tests (FOTs) in the UK. Eur. Transp. Res. Rev. 2015, 7. [CrossRef]

13. Knapper, A.; Van Nes, N.; Christoph, M.; Hagenzieker, M.; Brookhuis, K. The use of navigation systems in naturalistic driving.

Trafﬁc Inj. Prev. 2016, 17, 264–270. [CrossRef]

14. Yusoff, N.M.; Ahmad, R.F.; Guillet, C.; Malik, A.S.; Saad, N.M.; Merienne, F. Selection of Measurement Method for Detection of

Driver Visual Cognitive Distraction: A Review. IEEE Access 2017, 7, 22844–22854. [CrossRef]

15. Lagoo, R.; Charissis, V.; Harrison, D. Mitigating Driver’s Distraction with the use of Augmented Reality Head-Up Display and

Gesture Recognition system. IEEE Consum. Electron. Mag. 2019, 8, 79–85. [CrossRef]

16. Regan, M.A.; Hallett, C.; Gordon, C.P. Driver distraction and driver inattention: Deﬁnition, relationship and taxonomy. Accid.

Anal. Prev. 2011, 43, 1771–1781. [CrossRef]

17. Rydström, A.; Broström, R.; Bengtsson, P. A comparison of two contemporary types of in-car multifunctional interfaces. Appl.

Ergon. 2012, 43, 507–514. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

18. Alam, K.M.; Saini, M.; El Saddik, A. Toward Social Internet of Vehicles: Concept, Architecture, and Applications. IEEE Access

2015, 3, 343–357. [CrossRef]

19. Butt, T.A.; Iqbal, R.; Salah, K.; Aloqaily, M.; Jararweh, Y. Privacy Management in Social Internet of Vehicles: Review, Challenges

and Blockchain-Based Solutions. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 79694–79713. [CrossRef]

20. Pickering, C.A.; Burnham, K.J.; Richardson, M.J. A review of automotive human-machine interface technologies and techniques
to reduce driver distraction. In Proceedings of the 2nd IET International Conference on System Safety, London, UK, 22–24 October
2007; pp. 223–228.

21. Mihai, D.; Dumitru, A.; Postelnicu, C.; Mogan, G. Video-based evaluation of driver’s visual attention using smartphones. In
Proceedings of the 2015 6th International Conference on Information, Intelligence, Systems and Applications (IISA), Corfu,
Greece, 6–8 July 2015; pp. 1–5.

22. Artner, G.; Kotterman, W.; del Galdo, G.; Hein, M. Automotive Antenna Roof for Cooperative Connected Driving. IEEE Access

2019, 7, 20083–20090. [CrossRef]

23. Charissis, V.; Papanastasiou, S.; Vlachos, G. Comparative Study of Prototype Automotive HUD vs. HDD: Collision Avoidance
Simulation and Results. In Proceedings of the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) World Congress and Exhibition, Detroit,
MI, USA, 14–17 April 2008.

24. Charissis, V.; Naef, M. Evaluation of Prototype Automotive Head-Up Display Interface: Testing Driver’s Focusing Ability through
a VR Simulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Intelligent Vehicle Symposium, (IV ‘07), Istanbul, Turkey, 13–15 June 2007; pp.
560–565.

25. Beck, D.; Park, W. Perceived Importance of Automotive HUD Information Items: A Study With Experienced HUD Users. IEEE

Access 2018, 6, 21901–21909. [CrossRef]

26. Gabbard, J.L.; Fitch, M.G.; Hyungil, K. Behind the glass: Driver challenges and opportunities for AR automotive applications.

Proc. IEEE 2014, 102, 124–136. [CrossRef]

27. Hyungil, K.; Xuefang, W.; Gabbard, J.L.; Polys, N.F. Exploring head-up augmented reality interfaces for crash warning systems.
In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications, ACM
Automotive UI 2013, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, 27–30 October 2013; pp. 224–227.

28. Weinberg, G.; Harsham, B.; Medenica, Z. Evaluating the usability of a head-up display for selection from choice lists in cars. In
Proceedings of the 3rd ACM International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications,
Automotive UI 2011, Salzburg, Austria, 30 November–2 December 2011; pp. 39–46.

29. Brand, D.; Büchele, K.; Meschtscherjakov, A. Pointing at the HUD: Gesture Interaction Using a Leap Motion. In Proceedings of
the 8th ACM International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications, ACM Automotive
UI 2016, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 24–26 October 2016; pp. 167–172.

30. Cacciapuoti, A.S.; Sankhe, K.; Calefﬁ, M.; Chowdhury, K.R. Beyond 5G: THz-based medium access protocol for mobile heteroge-

neous networks. IEEE Commun. Mag. 2018, 56, 110–115. [CrossRef]

31. Navarre, C.; Kotov, A.; Hwang, L.; Barbier, J.Y.; Jarvin, M. The Anatomy and Physiology of the Used Car Business: A Global Analysis
with Particular Reference to Four Key Markets: U.S., Canada, France, Germany; Twidle, K., Ed.; Car Internet Research Program II and
Capgemini: Paris, France, 2007.

32. Wu, H.; Wang, Y.; Liu, J.; Qiu, J.; Zhang, X.L. User-deﬁned gesture interaction for in-vehicle information systems. Multimed. Tools

Appl. 2020, 79, 263–288. [CrossRef]

33. Pickering, C.A.; Burnham, K.J.; Richardson, M.J. A Research Study of Hand Gesture Recognition Technologies and Applications
for Human Vehicle Interaction. In Proceedings of the 2007 3rd Institution of Engineering and Technology Conference on
Automotive Electronics, Warwick, UK, 28–29 June 2007; pp. 1–15.

34. Zobl, M.; Geiger, M.; Bengler, K.; Lang, M. A usability study on hand-gesture controlled operation of in-car devices. In Proceedings

of the Human-Computer Interaction International, New Orleans, LA, USA, 5–10 August 2001; ISBN 0-8058-3609-8.

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

27 of 28

35. Alpern, M.; Minardo, K. Developing a car gesture interface for use as a secondary task. In Proceedings of the Extended abstracts
of the 2003 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2003, Ft. Lauderdale, FL, USA, 5–10 April 2003; pp.
932–933.

37.

36. Reimer, B.; Mehler, B.; Dobres, J.; Coughlin, J.F. The Effects of a Production Level “Voice-Command” Interface on Driver Behaviour:
Reported Workload, Physiology, Visual Attention, and Driving Performance; MIT Age-Lab Technical Report (No. 2013-18A); MIT
Agelab White Paper; MIT: Cambridge, MA, USA, 2013.
SAE International. Development of Design and Engineering Recommendations for in-Vehicle Alphanumeric Messages; Document SAE
J2831_202007; SAE International: Warrendale, PA, USA, 2020.
Inzuka, Y.; Osumi, Y.; Shinkai, H. Visibility of Head-Up Display for Automobiles. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of
the Human Factors Society, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2–6 September 1999; Human Factors Society: Santa Monica, CA, USA, 1999;
pp. 1574–1578.

38.

39. Yoo, H.; Tsimhoni, O.; Watanabe, H.; Green, P.; Shah, R. Display of HUD Warnings to Drivers: Determining on Optimal Location;

Technical Report UMTRI-99-9; University of Michigan, Transportation Research Institute: Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 1999.

40. Tsimhoni, O.; Green, P.; Watanabe, H. Detecting and Reading Text on HUDs: Effects of Driving Workload and Message Location.
In Proceedings of the 11th Annual Intelligent Transportation Systems America (ITSA) Meeting, Miami, FL, USA, May 2001.
41. Charissis, V.; Naef, M.; Papanastasiou, S.; Patera, M. Designing a direct manipulation HUD interface for in-vehicle infotainment.
In Human-Computer Interaction. Interaction Platforms and Techniques, Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2007; Volume 4551/2007, pp. 551–559. [CrossRef]

42. Nielsen, M.; Moeslund, T.B.; Storring, M.; Granum, E. HCI Beyond the GUI, Design for Haptic, Speech, Olfactory, and Other

Non-Traditional Interfaces; Kortum, P., Ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2008; pp. 75–103.

43. Zhang, Y.; Owechko, Y.; Zhang, J. Driver cognitive workload estimation: A data-driven perspective. In Proceedings of the 7th

International IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, Washington, DC, USA, 3–6 October 2004; pp. 642–647.
44. Young, K.L.; Salmon, P.M. Examining the relationship between driver distraction and driving errors: A discussion of theory,

45.

studies and methods. Saf. Sci. 2012, 50, 165–174. [CrossRef]
Strayer, D.L.; Cooper, J.M.; Goethe, R.M.; McCarty, M.M.; Getty, D.; Biondi, F. Visual and Cognitive Demands of Using In-Vehicle
Infotainment Systems; AAA Foundation for Trafﬁc Safety: Washington, WA, USA, 2017.

46. Wittmann, M.; Kiss, M.; Gugg, P.; Steffen, A.; Fink, M.; Pöppel, E.; Kamiya, H. Effects of display position of a visual in-vehicle

task on simulated driving. Appl. Ergon. 2006, 37, 187–199. [CrossRef]

47. Owens, J.M.; McLaughlin, S.B.; Sudweeks, J. Driver performance while text messaging using handheld and in-vehicle systems.

Accid. Anal. Prev. 2011, 43, 939–947. [CrossRef]

48. Ma, J.; Gong, Z.; Tan, J.; Zhang, Q.; Zuo, Y. Assessing the driving distraction effect of vehicle HMI displays using data mining

49.

techniques. Transp. Res. Part F Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav. 2020, 69, 235–250. [CrossRef]
Frank, M.; Drikakis, D.; Charissis, V. Machine-Learning Methods for Computational Science and Engineering. Computation 2020,
8, 15. [CrossRef]

50. Charissis, V.; Papanastasiou, S. Artiﬁcial Intelligence Rationale for Autonomous Vehicle Agents Behaviour in Driving Simulation

Environment. In Advances in Robotics, Automation and Control; InTechOpen: London, UK, 2008; pp. 314–332.

51. Bram-Larbi, K.F.; Charissis, V.; Khan, S.; Harrison, D.K.; Drikakis, D. Improving Emergency Vehicles’ Response Times with the
Use of Augmented Reality and Artiﬁcial Intelligence. In Proceedings of the HCI International 2020—Late Breaking Papers: Digital
Human Modeling and Ergonomics, Mobility and Intelligent Environments, Copenhagen, Denmark, 19–24 July 2020; Stephanidis,
C., Duffy, V.G., Streitz, N., Konomi, S., Krömker, H., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2020; Volume 12429. [CrossRef]
Scottish Government. Go Safe on Scotland’s Roads It’s Everyone’s Responsibility; Safety Framework to 2020, Report; Scottish
Government: Edinburgh, UK, 2009; ISBN 9780755958184.

52.

53. Charissis, V.; Papanastasiou, S.; Mackenzie, L.; Arafat, S. Evaluation of Collision Avoidance Prototype Head-Up Display Interface
for Older Drivers. In Human-Computer Interaction. Towards Mobile and Intelligent Interaction Environments. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science; Jacko, J.A., Ed.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2011; Volume 6763. [CrossRef]

54. Michalaki, P.; Quddus, M.; Pitﬁeld, D.; Huetson, A. A time-series analysis of motorway collisions in England considering road

infrastructure, socio-demographics, trafﬁc and weather characteristics. J. Transp. Health 2016, 3, 9–20. [CrossRef]

55. Park, S.; Lee, S.; Park, S.; Park, S. AI-Based Physical and Virtual Platform with 5-Layered Architecture for Sustainable Smart

Energy City Development. Sustainability 2019, 11, 4479. [CrossRef]

56. Al-Ali, A.R.; Gupta, R.; Zaman Batool, T.; Landolsi, T.; Aloul, F.; Al Nabulsi, A. Digital Twin Conceptual Model within the Context

of Internet of Things. Future Internet 2020, 12, 163. [CrossRef]

57. Park, S.; Park, S.H.; Park, L.W.; Park, S.; Lee, S.; Lee, T.; Lee, S.H.; Jang, H.; Kim, S.M.; Chang, H.; et al. Design and Implementation
of a Smart IoT Based Building and Town Disaster Management System in Smart City Infrastructure. Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 2239.
[CrossRef]

58. Wang, S.; Charissis, V.; Harrison, D. Augmented Reality Prototype HUD for Passenger Infotainment in a Vehicular Environment.

Adv. Sci. Technol. Eng. Syst. J. 2017, 634–641. [CrossRef]

59. Wu, C.; Wu, H.; Lyu, N.; Zhengt, M. Take-Over Performance and Safety Analysis Under Different Scenarios and Secondary Tasks

in Conditionally Automated Driving. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 136924–136933. [CrossRef]

Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, 1397

28 of 28

60.

Jose, R.; Lee, G.A.; Billinghurst, M.A. Comparative study of simulated augmented reality displays for vehicle navigation.
In Proceedings of the 28th Australian Conference on Computer-Human Interaction, OzCHI 2016, Launceston, Australia,
29 November–2 December 2016; pp. 40–48.

61. Parada-Loira, F.; González-Agulla, E.; Alba-Castro, J.L. Hand gestures to control infotainment equipment in cars. In Proceedings

62.

of the 2014 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium Proceedings, Dearborn, MI, USA, 8–11 June 2014; pp. 1–6. [CrossRef]
Simons-Morton, B.G.; Guo, F.; Klauer, S.G.; Ehsani, J.P.; Pradhan, A.K. Keep your eyes on the road: Young driver crash risk
increases according to duration of distraction. J. Adolesc. Health 2014, 54 (Suppl. S5), S61–S67. [CrossRef]
Strayer, D.L.; Watson, J.M.; Drews, F.A. Cognitive distraction while multitasking in the automobile. In The Psychology of Learning
and Motivation: Advances in Research and Theory; Ross, B., Ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2011; Volume 54, pp. 29–58.
64. Peng, Y.; Boyle, L.; Lee, J. Reading, typing, and driving: How interactions with in-vehicle systems degrade driving performance.

63.

Transp. Res. Part F Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav. 2014, 27, 182–191. [CrossRef]

65. Villalobos-Zúñiga, G.; Kujala, T.; Oulasvirta, A. T9 + HUD: Physical keypad and HUD can improve driving performance while
typing and driving. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular
Applications, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 24–26 October 2016; pp. 177–184.

66. Victor, T.W.; Harbluk, J.L.; Engström, J.A. Sensitivity of eye-movement measures to in-vehicle task difﬁculty. Transp. Res. Part F

Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav. 2005, 8, 167–190. [CrossRef]

67. Ranney, T.A.; Baldwin, G.H.S.; Smith, L.A.; Mazzae, E.N.; Pierce, R.S. Detection Response Task Evaluation for Driver Distraction
Measurement Application; Report No. DOT HS 812 077; National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration (NHTSA): Washington,
WA, USA, 2014.
Stojmenova, K.; Sodnik, J. Detection-Response Task—Uses and Limitations. Sensors 2018, 18, 594. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

68.

