--- Page 1 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS—PART B: CYBERNETICS, VOL. 39, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2009
85
A Novel Active Heads-Up Display
for Driver Assistance
Anup Doshi, Student Member, IEEE, Shinko Yuanhsien Cheng, Member, IEEE, and
Mohan Manubhai Trivedi, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—In this paper, we introduce a novel laser-based
wide-area heads-up windshield display which is capable of actively
interfacing with a human as part of a driver assistance system.
The dynamic active display (DAD) is a unique prototype interface
that presents safety-critical visual icons to the driver in a manner
that minimizes the deviation of his or her gaze direction without
adding to unnecessary visual clutter. As part of an automotive
safety system, the DAD presents alerts in the ﬁeld of view of the
driver only if necessary, which is based upon the state and pose
of the driver, vehicle, and environment. This paper examines the
effectiveness of DAD through a comprehensive comparative exper-
imental evaluation of a speed compliance driver assistance system,
which is implemented on a vehicular test bed. Three different
types of display protocols for assisting a driver to comply with
speed limits are tested on actual roadways, and these are compared
with a conventional dashboard display. Given the inclination,
drivers who are given an overspeed warning alert reduced the time
required to slow down to the speed limit by 38% (p < 0.01) as
compared with the drivers not given the alert. Additionally, certain
alerts decreased distraction levels by reducing the time spent
looking away from the road by 63% (p < 0.01). Ultimately, these
alerts demonstrate the utility and promise of the DAD system.
Index Terms—Active safety, driver assistance systems, driver
distraction, head movement tracking, human factors, integrated
safety systems, intelligent driver-support systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
S
AFETY is a major cause for innovation in automobile
industries. Many new technologies are emerging to meet
the increasing desire for safer vehicles and roadways.
One factor that plays a big role in road safety is excessive
speed. Speeding is a signiﬁcant cause of accidents and motor
vehicle infractions. According to the National Highway Trans-
portation Safety Administration (NHTSA) [1], 13 113 lives
were lost in 2005 in crashes involving speeding. Indeed, 30% of
all crashes involved speeding, involving a cost of approximately
Manuscript received April 16, 2007; revised October 20, 2007. First pub-
lished July 29, 2008; current version published January 15, 2009. This work
was supported in part by UC Discovery, by the Digital Media Innovations
Program, and by the Electronics Research Laboratory, Volkswagen of America.
This paper was recommended by Guest Editor A. Pentland.
A. Doshi and M. M. Trivedi are with the Laboratory for Intelligent and Safe
Automobiles, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
(e-mail: andoshi@ucsd.edu; mtrivedi@ucsd.edu).
S. Y. Cheng was with the Laboratory for Intelligent and Safe Automobiles,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA. He is now with
HRL Laboratories, LLC, Malibu, CA 90265 USA (e-mail: sycheng@ucsd.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TSMCB.2008.923527
$40.4 billion each year in the U.S. alone. Furthermore, most of
those crashes are at speeds under 55 mi/h, which are off of the
highways.
For these reasons and more, auto manufacturers have be-
gun implementing technology-based safety systems. Some of
these state-of-the-art systems include collision warning and
brake support, intelligent night vision with pedestrian detection,
backup warnings and cameras, and lane departure warning
systems. Despite this progress, it is not clear whether these
systems can urgently and reliably warn the driver without
distracting him or her from the road conditions. Fixed displays
will not grab the driver’s attention if he or she is looking away.
Auditory (and haptic) displays may not be able to convey the
same amount of information quickly and succinctly. Drivers
may already know about impending danger, and they may be
annoyed by systems that provide redundant warnings. Side-
screen displays might take the driver’s attention off the road.
We introduce and evaluate the dynamic active display
(DAD), which is a unique large-area windshield display de-
signed to actively alert the driver in critical situations. As a
novel prototype developed in conjunction with Volkswagen,
the DAD is able to use a laser to display dynamic visual
icons nearly anywhere on the windshield. Within the author’s
knowledge, the implementation of such a wide-area windshield
display in a real test bed is unprecedented. It allows for the real-
world experimentation of concepts which were previously only
testable in laboratory settings, thus moving beyond the realm of
simulated studies.
The DAD can be used to provide context-speciﬁc alerts to the
driver, and it is capable of changing the position and intensity of
an alert, depending on the attention of the driver. This “active”
alert thus makes decisions based upon the state and pose of the
driver, vehicle, and environment.
The display is presented as an effective medium to commu-
nicate important information to the driver while minimizing
distraction. As part of a quantitative evaluation of this system,
we ﬁnd that DAD demonstrates signiﬁcant improvements in
both effectiveness and the minimization of distractions as part
of a driver assistance system.
This paper is organized as follows. Background and re-
lated works are discussed in Section II. Section III de-
scribes the instrumented Laboratory for Intelligent and Safe
Automobiles—Passat (LISA-P) test bed and the capabilities of
DAD. A comprehensive evaluation of DAD in a speed control
experiment is described in Section IV. Conclusions and future
research are discussed in Section V.
1083-4419/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE

--- Page 2 ---
86
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS—PART B: CYBERNETICS, VOL. 39, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2009
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS
A. Background
1) Modalities of Displays: The driver can be informed of
critical situations via several different modalities. Haptic in-
terfaces include any sort of interface that will use force feed-
back or touch sensitivity. Examples could include resistance
or shaking of the steering wheel or resistance in the brake and
accelerator pedals. These have the advantage of being intuitive;
they can also quickly inform the driver even if the driver is
distracted, considering that the driver is usually in contact with
the interface.
Audio interfaces may include voiced commands, such as
those given by Navigation systems, or even simple beeps and
sounds. Most vehicles are equipped with warning beeps to
indicate if the driver has left his or her headlights on or if the
driver is not wearing a seatbelt. The beeps are useful if the
driver knows what the sound means, or if the sound occurs
in conjunction with a visual cue. To convey more information
in the auditory channel, as is done with voiced navigation
directions, for example, requires more time.
Visual interfaces abound in the vehicular environment. Ex-
amples include the dashboard of the vehicle, showing the
speedometer, tachometer, and side-screen monitors for naviga-
tion systems. Visual cues have the advantage of being able to
quickly convey a wealth of information to the driver. However,
there is a great deal of visual distraction in a vehicular environ-
ment; therefore, informing a driver using this modality could be
a challenge.
Several cars these days also use heads-up displays (HUDs)
to convey information to the driver. As a subset of visual
interfaces, HUDs are designed to present information to the
driver, which is closer to his or her ﬁeld of view. Thus, the
driver does not have to look down to see the information but
can spend more time looking at the road. It is important to note,
however, that drivers will not be able to focus on the HUD and
the road at the same time, which is due to the effects of parallax.
Nevertheless, by presenting information that is closer to the
normal ﬁeld of view, HUDs require less effort on the part of the
driver than other kinds of visual displays [2]; therefore, it may
present an effective choice of conveying visual information.
2) Types of Displays: Moreover, independent of the modal-
ity, there can be several types of displays, depending on the
criticality of the situation. A “static” display will constantly dis-
play information, regardless of the situation. This may be useful
if the driver should be constantly aware of the information, as in
speed or engine temperature. “Dynamic” displays monitor the
state of the environment and the vehicle and change according-
ly, potentially alerting the driver only if there is an impending
event to be aware of. Navigation systems are certainly dynamic,
as well as dashboard warning lights for “engine check” and
others. Finally, an “active” display monitors the state of the
driver and displays information in response to the state. The
active display could infer the intent or focus of the driver
and could determine whether displaying information would
be useful or distracting. This also allows the display to
change position or even modality, depending on the driver’s
state.
Some types of displays are mature technologies and are
thereby widely implemented in vehicles. However, the design
of a “dynamic and active” display is an active research subject,
particularly in terms of investigating the effectiveness and the
robustness of the active display. These references are discussed
in more detail in the following section.
B. Related Works
A majority of research into “active” interfaces has mainly fo-
cused on simulator-based experiments. Experiments conducted
on such environments have evaluated various aspects of the ac-
tive displays, including appropriate display timings [3], [4], po-
sitions [2], [5], and driver responses [6] and attitudes [7]. These
have demonstrated the potential positive effects of the active
HUD. However, it is difﬁcult to draw conclusions for real-world
situations based on simulated experiments, considering that
there are many more variables present in real-world conditions.
According to an NHTSA driver workload metrics report [8]
Some effects were observed in the laboratory which
were not observed during driving. Until this is better
understood, judgments on task effects should reﬂect a
comprehensive evaluation approach that includes more
than just laboratory testing.
This motivates the need for an implemented test bed to experi-
ment in real-world conditions.
Sharon et al. [9] implemented an active interface for the
purpose of “coaching” or giving feedback to driving students.
The interfaces are auditory and haptic, however. Therefore,
very limited information can be communicated in urgent sit-
uations. Takemura et al. [10] experimented with a test bed
actively sensing the driver and environment states using cam-
eras and potentially advising the driver with voice synthesis.
Amditis et al. [11] proposed a test-bed solution for active
visual displays using side-screen and dashboard displays.
Petersson et al. [12] conducted experiments with camera-based
systems to detect driver and environment conditions, with an
active visual display in a side screen. Unfortunately, the side
screen requires the user to look away from the road to gauge
the information.
Furthermore, Liu and Wen [2] observed that truck drivers in
simulators were able to control their speed better with speed
information from a HUD rather than a heads-down display
(HDD). Their study had shown that a savings of 0.8 to 1.0 s
in driver reaction time can be achieved with the use of HUDs
to display warning information over conventional HDDs. We
present results of a similar comparison on actual roadways with
a novel experimental laser-based HUD.
Our contributions are the motivation and introduction of
a novel laser-based wide-area heads-up windshield display,
which is capable of actively interfacing with a human as part
of a driver assistance system. The DAD is a unique prototype
interface that presents safety-critical visual icons to the driver in
a manner that minimizes the deviation of his or her gaze direc-
tion without adding to unnecessary visual clutter. Furthermore,
as part of an active safety system, the DAD “actively” presents
alerts in the ﬁeld of view of the driver—only if necessary, which

--- Page 3 ---
DOSHI et al.: NOVEL ACTIVE HEADS-UP DISPLAY FOR DRIVER ASSISTANCE
87
Fig. 1.
LISA-P test bed.
are based upon the state and pose of the driver, vehicle, and
environment. We examine the effectiveness of DAD through a
comprehensive comparative experimental evaluation of a speed
compliance driver assistance system, which is implemented on
a vehicular test bed. Three different types of display protocols
for assisting a driver to comply with speed limits are tested on
actual roadways and compared with the conventional dashboard
speedometer. Given the inclination, drivers who are given an
overspeed warning alert reduced the amount of “time-to-slow-
back-down” to speed limit by 38% (p < 0.01), as compared
with drivers not given the alert. Additionally, certain alerts
decreased the distraction levels by reducing the time spent
looking away from the road by 63% (p < 0.01). Ultimately,
each of these alerts exhibits strengths in complementing ways,
demonstrating the utility and promise of the DAD system.
III. LISA-P TEST BED AND DAD ALERTS
The LISA-P test-bed setup is shown in Fig. 1. It is instru-
mented with a novel laser-based large-area windshield display
whose capabilities are shown in Fig. 2. The DAD is capable of
displaying alerts anywhere on the windshield via a blue-colored
laser. Additionally, the LISA-P is outﬁtted with an optical
motion capture system, a vision-based eye gaze tracker, and
global positioning system (GPS) and controller area network
(CAN) bus sensors to determine the state of the occupant and
vehicle. A more detailed description of the LISA-P can be
found in [13].
Considering that speeding is a leading cause of crashes, any
manner of safely reducing speed from over the speed limits
may be useful. In this light, a DAD-based speed compliance
aid is presented and used to quantitatively analyze the safety
and effectiveness of the DAD over having normal dashboard-
based displays.
There are three proposed alert modes for this particular aid,
whose designs were motivated by the strengths and weaknesses
of human vision. The human eye can be divided into three
regions based on acuity to different visual cues: the fovea and
parafovea regions that subtend about 10◦, which are both found
in the macula, and the peripheral vision region, extending to
180◦. Vision within the macula has the highest visual acuity,
which is necessary for reading, watching television, driving,
and any activity where visual detail is of primary importance.
Fig. 2.
LISA-P test bed. DAD display capabilities and limitations and the
approximate location of alerts used for the speed control experiment. Within
these limitations, the DAD is capable of drawing anywhere on the windshield.
The peripheral vision extends beyond it and has good motion
detection and temporal resolution [14].
For critically important situations, a visual alert directly
presented in the driver’s central visual ﬁeld should be able to
catch his or her attention immediately; however, this runs the
risk of competing directly with the driver’s view of the road
and surroundings. For the particular case of a speed limit or
current speed alert, the more appropriate placement would be
a secondary location where a driver has the option of taking
notice if the situation does not demand complete concentration.
Watanabe et al. [15] observed that the fastest response times
to HUD warnings presented during videos of drives occurred
when the warning was placed 5◦to the right of the center of line
of sight. Because of the fast response times and the secondary
importance of the speed alerts, all alerts in our speed control
experiments were placed approximately 5◦diagonally to the
bottom right from the center of the line of sight.
There is also a need to display alerts that grab the attention
of the driver from the secondary location, particularly when the
speed limit has been exceeded. Considering that the peripheral
visual ﬁeld is most sensitive to motion cues, we animate the
alerts with zooming and bouncing effects for the purpose of
attracting attention. The zooming enlarges the alert every other
second, and the bouncing consists of a vertical location change
that is similar to the motion of a rubber ball bouncing off the
ground. Both take into account the apparent need for the driver
to ﬁxate upon the alert for a moment in order to recognize its
meaning. The zoom consists of two sizes, with 1 s separating
the times between the changing sizes. The bounce starts with
high bounces for 0.5 s; however, for 1.0 s, the icon bounces
only subtly until it ﬁnally comes to rest at the base location.
Both allow for some time in which the icon is not or barely

--- Page 4 ---
88
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS—PART B: CYBERNETICS, VOL. 39, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2009
moving for the eyes to ﬁxate upon. Furthermore, the alerts
were designed to be approximately 2 in tall, such that they
were big enough to be clearly understood and yet small enough
to prevent occlusions. The zoom doubles the size of the icon,
whereas the bounce moves the icon approximately 2 in.
Considering that it is easy to measure amount of time
spent over the speed limit (given the current speed and the
speed limit), the speed compliance module is chosen over
the other two modules for a quantitative evaluation of DAD.
The following section uses this design methodology to de-
termine the performance and safety of the DAD in a speed
compliance experiment.
IV. DAD EVALUATION: SPEED COMPLIANCE EXPERIMENT
A. Experiment Details
We test four strategies of speed alerts; each driver is asked
to drive the same route for each alert strategy. The alerts are
presented in different orders for each driver, and the drivers are
already familiar with the area. We measure the amount of time
the driver spent above the speed limit, the ratio of time spent
observing the alert or dash or the road in general, and the distri-
bution of speeds measured for roads with various speed limits.
For each drive, we vary the display in one of the following
four ways.
1) No display—No DAD alert is given.
2) Warning—A triangular exclamation point warning sign
appears and bounces as soon as the driver exceeds speed
limit.
3) Numbers—A textual alert constantly shows the driver’s
current speed and the road speed limit (e.g., 43/45). The
text representing the driver’s speed zooms in and out if
the driver is above the speed limit.
4) Graphic—A graphical alert constantly shows a vertical
status bar with the driver’s speed and the speed limit
clearly marked. The entire graphic bounces if the driver
is above the speed limit.
A graphical representation is shown in Fig. 3.
On each of the four iterations (each using a different display
condition) of the experiment, the subject is told to drive on a
given road course lasting approximately 20 min. The route is
carefully chosen to include a variety of situations and environ-
ments, as shown in Fig. 4. The speed limits vary from 15 to
65 mi/h, and the roads range from small local roads through
campus to major highways. The distances were calculated such
that approximately 3–4 min was spent driving in each speed
range.
During the drive, speed limits are acquired by determining
the current global position in longitude and latitude via GPS
and by searching the list of road way points for the closest
match. Associated with each way point is a speed limit that was
manually annotated with the speed limit. The distance between
each way point is approximately 0.1 mi. When the current
position deviates from all way points by more than the width of
the widest road, the speed limit is defaulted to a nonvalid value.
Head pose is measured by using a marker-based motion
capture system, and eye gaze is measured by using a camera-
Fig. 3.
Illustration of the three alerts used.
Fig. 4.
Driving Test Path, which includes local roads, main roads, and
highways, with speed limits ranging from 15 to 65 mph.
based eye tracking system. The vehicle speed data, as part of
over 20 other vehicle parameters, are recorded via the vehicle’s
CAN bus and are passed as an input to the display module, to
inform the subject of the speeds. A millisecond-accurate clock
in the PC is used to time stamp all entries of data recorded. The
setup for the experimental test-bed LISA-P is shown in Fig. 1.

--- Page 5 ---
DOSHI et al.: NOVEL ACTIVE HEADS-UP DISPLAY FOR DRIVER ASSISTANCE
89
Fig. 5.
Results of sample test run for (top) condition 1—no display and
(bottom) condition 2—warning sign. The driver’s ability to maintain speed is
clearly evidenced by the reduced amount of time accidentally spent over the
speed limit in condition 2.
The subjects are asked to drive as they would normally but
to pay particular attention to obey the speed limits. Each driver
was familiar with the roads and path before beginning the drive.
Data were collected from a total of 11 test subjects with varying
experience levels, ranging from age 22 and 50, several with
glasses, with a total of over 14 h of driving data. All drives
were during the early evening hours, which are free from rush-
hour trafﬁc. Over the set of drivers, the order of the four display
conditions was varied, hopefully mitigating the impact of any
learning effects over the course of the study.
B. Results and Analysis
Plots of a sample drive showing speed versus time, and the
corresponding speed limits, for display conditions 1 and 2 are
shown in Fig. 5.
For each display condition, the driver was asked to drive nor-
mally, paying attention to speed limits. To analyze the ability of
the driver to stay under the limit, one statistic measured was the
“time to slow back down” or the average amount of time the
driver spent over the speed limit before returning to under
the limit. This measure was chosen to clearly represent how
immediate were the effects of the different warnings. This mea-
sure also ignores route timing differences due to trafﬁc lights,
congestion, and environment changes, all of which would cause
biases in other absolute measures such as “total amount of time
spent over speed limit.”
The results are shown in Fig. 6, and the statistics are listed
in Table I. With the second display condition, there is a clear
drop in the amount of time it took each subject to return to
driving below the speed limit once the warning was shown. For
all test subjects, the caution symbol from the second condition
caused a drop of 2.24 s in the average time to slow back down.
We then normalize these times relative to the times of display
condition 1 in order to better compare relative effects over each
driver, arriving at the values shown at the bottom of Fig. 6.
Using this normalized metric, we can conclude that, on average,
Fig. 6.
Time to slow back down or the amount of time spent over the speed
limit before slowing back down with different alerts. Each experiment consists
of 4 trials by 11 different drivers. The overall averages are in gray, superimposed
by the individual averages. The top plot represents the raw data, and the bottom
plot shows the same data normalized by the values of condition 1—no DAD.
See Table I for numerical ﬁgures.
TABLE I
AVERAGE “TIME TO SLOW BACK DOWN” WITH DIFFERENT
ALERTS OVER ALL DRIVERS
the second display condition caused a drop of 38% in the time
to slow back down.
The other two warnings involving the displays of numbers
and graphics were quite effective but not as much as the
warning sign. As discussed later, this can be attributed to the
two “active” signs being constantly displayed and thereby not
catching as much of the driver’s attention when the drivers were
over the speed limit. Additionally, their information takes a bit
of time to process, compared with the static display which can
be understood immediately.
To further understand these data, an analysis of variance
(ANOVA) was performed on the normalized statistic “time to

--- Page 6 ---
90
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS—PART B: CYBERNETICS, VOL. 39, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2009
Fig. 7.
Histograms of speeds for each section of road with the given speed limit. Signiﬁcant differences can be seen by comparing over-speed cases across the
4 conditions, especially at 15 and 65 mph limits.
slow back down.” The test was conducted to ascertain whether
the pattern shown at the bottom plot of Fig. 6 was a coincidence
or whether the reduction in time in experiments 2, 3, and 4
actually represents general patterns. Analysis was done by
comparing two conditions at a time using ANOVA, which is
essentially equivalent to a t test. The analysis showed that
the second display condition implies a statistically signiﬁcant
reduction in time to slow back down (p = 0.0039 < 0.01),
whereas the third and fourth conditions did not have statistically
signiﬁcant effects. Based on the calculated conﬁdence intervals
from the 11 test subjects, we may conclude that 99% of the pop-
ulation would experience between 4.94% and 71.76% reduction
in time to slow back down using this second display condition.
Furthermore, one could divide the population of test subjects
into “compliant” and “noncompliant” groups. The “noncompli-
ant” drivers (consisting of the ﬁrst four in Fig. 6) exhibited no
clear pattern in response to any of the alerts (p = 0.10 > 0.01).
Interestingly, there was no clear common trait among these
noncompliant drivers, as they were of varying age, gender, and
backgrounds. The rest of the drivers were extremely responsive
to all the alerts (p = 0.000082 < 0.0001) and could be labeled
as “compliant.” Thus, while we can conclude that the warning,
display condition 2, causes a 38% overall average drop in time
to slow back down (p < 0.01), we can also identify that some
users may be “noncompliant,” in which case they are less likely
to respond. As discussed later, the active nature of the DAD
could allow the system to identify such noncompliant drivers by
analyzing historical responses and accordingly adjust or remove
the alerts.
C. Driver Distraction: Pose Analysis
By analyzing the driver’s behavior, it becomes possible to
gauge the distraction level of the alerts and determine whether
they were taking the driver’s focus away from the road. Au-
tomatic analysis of pose and gaze can be done by using the

--- Page 7 ---
DOSHI et al.: NOVEL ACTIVE HEADS-UP DISPLAY FOR DRIVER ASSISTANCE
91
LISA-P test-bed setup with the motion capture system and
the near-infrared vision-based gaze tracking system. We can
use these to determine whether the HUD kept the driver from
taking his or her attention off the road, ostensibly to look at the
dashboard when the driver has drifted above the speed limit.
This would determine the drivers’ attention and distraction level
in response to various visual cues, which has implications on
the safety of the alerts.
1) Eye Movement and Head Pose: Several of the studies
mentioned in Section II-B focus on systems monitoring the
driver, particularly eye gaze tracking systems [8], [10], [12].
However, although modern eye gaze trackers have become
extremely sophisticated, they still suffer under fast-changing
in-vehicle conditions [16]–[18]. Indeed, others who have mea-
sured eye gaze in vehicles have usually tracked eyes in more
stable lighting environments. NHTSA [8] also conducted a
thorough study into driver workload metrics, using eye gaze
as a measurement tool. However, in that study, the eye gaze
patterns were manually marked up by humans after the data
were recorded in order to achieve more accurate results.
We found that, after automatically collecting marked eye
gaze data, these were not accurate or robust enough to draw
systematic conclusions. Speciﬁcally, many of the drivers in the
current experiment wore glasses, which, under strong illumina-
tion changes, heavily affect the performance of the eye tracker,
effectively serving as occlusions. Moreover, when the driver
turns his or her head out of range of the eye tracking cameras,
the gaze estimates are no longer valid. Finally, the eye gaze
tracking system was cumbersome in that it required training
for each individual subject, and slight errors in training would
decrease the accuracy of the gaze estimates.
We determined that head pose estimates were reliable and,
thereby, a better estimate of the attention and distraction levels
of the driver. The marker-based head pose estimation system
used in these experiments, in comparison, is extremely accurate
and precise [19]. It does not suffer under lighting changes, con-
sidering that it is based on detecting infrared reﬂections off of
the markers placed on the head. With the LISA-P instrumented
with this powerful measurement tool, we were able to draw
reliable data on driver reactions to the DAD alerts.
2) Distraction Results: The input head pose data use labeled
calibration data as a reference to cluster into three regions:
looking “up,” or forward at the windshield; “down,” or at the
dashboard; and “at DAD,” at the speciﬁc location of the DAD
alert. These classes are shown in Fig. 8. To calibrate the regions,
several subjects were asked to look around each region, and
the measurements were labeled and stored. Input data were
then clustered by using an L-2 norm-based nearest neighbor
classiﬁer.
Considering that each driver is unique in reaction speeds,
the absolute amount of time spent looking in each direction
is not a very reliable metric, particularly because the times
being considered are so quick. Therefore, for each driver, we
considered the relative amount of time spent looking in each
direction with an alert (display conditions 2–4), compared with
the time spent when there was no alert (display condition 1). In
other words, we measured the time in each direction with alerts
as a percentage of the time in each direction without alerts.
Fig. 8.
Head pose estimates are classiﬁed into three clusters, with each
corresponding to a certain region in front of the driver, namely: “up,” “down,”
or “at DAD.”
TABLE II
NORMALIZED RATIOS OF TIME SPENT “LOOKING” IN EACH DIRECTION
WHILE ABOVE THE SPEED LIMIT, WITH VERSUS WITHOUT ALERTS,
WHICH ARE AVERAGED OVER ALL DRIVERS
This normalized metric provides greater insight into the relative
glance patterns of the drivers over each condition.
Results of each display condition are shown in Table II,
again noting the behavior while the driver was traveling beyond
speed limit.
The effects of the warning in display condition 2 can be
clearly seen, in that the driver was not warned of his or her
current speed so the driver had to look down to the dash to ﬁnd
out how much he or she needed to brake. This notion is veriﬁed
by the head movements during display conditions 3 and 4,
in which the speed was dynamically displayed to the driver,
precluding the need to look down.
We can draw from these results that the alert type from
display condition 3 caused the least distraction. The driver spent
only 37% of the normal time looking down, and the time spent
looking forward through the windshield increased by 10%. This
amount of time is particularly important when considering that
every second is precious when it comes to avoiding accidents.
An ANOVA implies that the increase in forward-looking time
might not be as statistically signiﬁcant, whereas the time spent
looking down is indeed a pattern, with p = 0.0034 < 0.01.

--- Page 8 ---
92
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS—PART B: CYBERNETICS, VOL. 39, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2009
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUDING REMARKS
A novel interface for communicating information to a driver
was introduced, and its motivations over other interfaces were
presented. As part of an active driver assistance system, the
DAD is a unique and demonstrably capable display.
Results were presented for a series of experiments conducted
to discover the most effective and least distracting class of alerts
using a HUD to assist a driver in maintaining speed. Head pose
data were analyzed to determine the effects of the alerts on the
driver’s attention and focus.
The overall results in Table I show that the warning display
that appears in the driver’s peripheral vision while he or she is
driving above the speed limit is most effective in assisting the
drivers to maintain speeds within or below the limit. With the
warning display, the driver tended to speed only 62% as much
compared with a conventional speedometer. ANOVA implies
that these results are indeed general patterns, with p = 0.0039.
In addition, results from the head pose data imply that the
warning display actually increased the time looking away from
the road; however, the numerical display decreased the time
looking down by 63% overall (p = 0.0034).
These results were echoed by the test subjects themselves.
Among the most prevalent comments were that the warning
display was the most helpful because it caught their attention
better than the active displays and was able to inform them
that they were driving above the speed limit without causing
them to move their focus away from the road. They did have
to look down to gauge their speed more often, which could
ultimately decrease safety. The numerical display allowed them
to concentrate on the road more, as they did not have to look
down to see their speed; however, it was not effective enough
in grabbing their attention while drifting above the speed limit.
Finally, the graphical display took a bit of time to register the
information; therefore, it did not prove as useful, even though it
was effective in slowing the drivers down.
One possibility to improve the utility of the alerts would be
to combine the better aspects of each of them. The warning sign
would prove more effective if the speed was also displayed in
the driver’s ﬁeld of view. This kind of alert would still have
the ability to do the following: 1) quickly grab the driver’s
attention; 2) include information about how much to slow
down; and 3) allow the driver to maintain focus on the road.
At the same time, the alert could recognize, based on the
current driver’s responses to recent alerts, whether the driver is
“noncompliant,” which, as was explained earlier, decreases the
likelihood of responding to the DAD. If this is the case, it may
be wise to dynamically remove alerts to reduce distractions and
annoyances.
The active capabilities of DAD could also be useful in several
other situations, including backup warning and navigation aids.
Future experiments will evaluate the usefulness and critical
safety improvements in using these systems. It would also
be interesting to consider the problem of overlaying objects
or destinations with an alert on the windshield, which would
require accurate calibration and registration mechanisms.
It is interesting to note that certain displays can in-
crease distraction, whereas other displays decrease distraction.
Design would thus become paramount in considering safe
driver assistance systems. The ability of the DAD to test and
implement many different designs and placements of alerts is
thereby quite valuable. Considering that it is an active display,
the DAD can even adjust its display types and information to
suit a particular driver.
The DAD system has the potential to play a clear role in
improving driver assistance systems. This alert modality can
decrease distraction levels by alerting drivers without taking
their gaze off the road. It also can actively alert the driver
only if necessary, which is based on the state and pose of the
driver, vehicle, and environment. The experiments conducted in
this paper quantitatively show the improvements in the drivers’
abilities to control speed, as well as decreased distraction levels,
using the DAD—speed control system in real trafﬁc conditions
with the LISA-P test bed. Future research includes harnessing
the capabilities of DAD in improving and analyzing intelligent
driver assistance systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank J. Camhi and Dr. A. Stoschek
for helping them instrument the very ﬁrst prototype of the large-
area windshield display in their LISA-P test bed, E. Murphy-
Chutorian for his assistance with software libraries, and the
test subjects for their invaluable input and assistance in their
experiments. The authors would also like to thank the reviewers
for their insightful comments.
REFERENCES
[1] NHTSA National Center for Statistics and Analysis, Trafﬁc Safety Facts:
2005 Data—Speeding, 2006, Washington D.C.: U.S. Dept. Transp., Nat.
Highway Trafﬁc Safety Admin.
[2] Y.-C. Liu and M.-H. Wen, “Comparison of head-up display (HUD) vs.
head-down display (HDD): Driving performance of commercial vehicle
operators in Taiwan,” Int. J. Human-Comput. Studies, vol. 61, no. 5,
pp. 679–697, Nov. 2004.
[3] S. Nagirir, Y. Amano, K. Fukui, and S. Doi, “A study of a personally
adaptive driving support system using a driving simulator,” R&D Rev.
Toyota CRDL, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 24–33, 2004.
[4] G. Abe and J. Richardson, “Alarm timing, trust and driver expectation
for forward collision warning systems,” Appl. Ergon., vol. 37, no. 5,
pp. 577–586, Sep. 2006.
[5] M. Wittman, M. Kiss, P. Gugg, A. Steffen, M. Fink, E. Poppel, and
H. Kamiya, “Effects of display position of a visual in-vehicle task on
simulated driving,” Appl. Ergon., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 187–199, Mar. 2006.
[6] B. Okombi-Diba, M. Okuwa, Y. Uchiyama, A. Kozato, and T. Hongo,
“Evaluation of a night driver support system: Driver eye movement be-
havior,” in Proc. SICE Annu. Conf., Aug. 4–6, 2004, vol. 1, pp. 795–801.
[7] B. Donmez, L. N. Boyle, J. Lee, and D. McGehee, “Drivers’ attitudes
toward imperfect distraction mitigation strategies,” Transp. Res., Part F
Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav., vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 387–398, Nov. 2006.
[8] L. Angell, J. Auﬂick, P. Austria, D. Kochhar, L. Tijerina, W. Biever,
T. Diptiman, J. Hodgsett, and S. Kiger, “Driver workload metrics project:
Task 2 ﬁnal report,” U.S. Dept. Transp., NHTSA, Washington, D.C., Tech.
Rep. DOT HS 810 635, Nov. 2006.
[9] T. Sharon, T. Selker, L. Wagner, and A. Frank, “Carcoach: A generalized
layered architecture for educational car systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Softw.—Science, Technology Engineering, Feb. 2005, pp. 13–22.
[10] K. Takemura, J. Ido, Y. Matsumoto, and T. Ogasawara, “Drive monitoring
system based on non-contact measurement system of driver’s focus of vi-
sual attention,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp., Jun. 2003, pp. 581–586.
[11] A. Amditis, H. Kubmann, A. Polychronopoulos, J. Engstrom, and
L. Andreone, “System architecture for integrated adaptive HMI solu-
tions,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp., 2006, pp. 388–393.

--- Page 9 ---
DOSHI et al.: NOVEL ACTIVE HEADS-UP DISPLAY FOR DRIVER ASSISTANCE
93
[12] L. Petersson, L. Fletcher, and A. Zelinsky, “A framework for driver-in-
the-loop driver assistance systems,” in Proc. IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst.,
Sep. 2005, pp. 771–776.
[13] S. Y. Cheng and M. M. Trivedi, “Turn intent analysis using bodypose for
intelligent driver assistance,” Pervasive Comput., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 28–37,
Oct.–Dec. 2006.
[14] M. Rizzo and I. L. Kellison, “Eyes, Brains, and Autos,” Arch. Ophthal-
mol., vol. 122, no. 4, pp. 641–645, Apr. 2004.
[15] H. Watanabe, H. Yoo, O. Tsimhoni, and P. Green, “The effect of HUD
warning location on driver responses,” in Proc. Int. Transp. Syst. World
Congr., 1999, pp. 1–10.
[16] X. Liu, F. Xu, and K. Fujimura, “Real-time eye detection and tracking for
driver observation under various light conditions,” in Proc. IEEE Intell.
Veh. Symp., Jun. 2002, pp. 344–351.
[17] P. Wang, B. G. Matthew, J. Qiang, and W. J. Wayman, “Automatic eye
detection and its validation,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Face Recog. Grand
Challenge Experiments (CVPR), Jun. 2005, p. 164.
[18] J. Wu and M. M. Trivedi, “A binary tree for probability learning in eye
detection,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop FRGC CVPR, 2005, vol. 3, p. 170.
[19] A. D. Wiles, D. G. Thompson, and D. D. Frantz, “Accuracy assessment
and interpretation for optical tracking systems,” in Proc. SPIE—Medical
Imaging,
Visualization,
Image-Guided
Procedures,
Display,
2004,
vol. 5367, pp. 421–432.
[20] M. M. Trivedi and S. Y. Cheng, “Holistic sensing and active displays for
intelligent driver support systems,” Computer, vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 60–68,
May 2007.
[21] M. M. Trivedi, T. Gandhi, and J. McCall, “Looking-in and looking-out of
a vehicle: Computer-vision-based enhanced vehicle safety,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 108–120, Mar. 2007.
[22] J. McCall and M. M. Trivedi, “Driver behavior and situation aware brake
assistance for intelligent vehicles,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 95, no. 2, pp. 374–
387, Feb. 2007.
[23] K. W. Gish and L. Staplin, “Human factors aspects of using head up
displays in automobiles: A review of the literature,” U.S. Dept. Transp.,
NHTSA, Washington D.C., Tech. Rep. DOTT HS 808 320, Aug. 1995.
[24] A. Doshi and M. M. Trivedi, “A comparative exploration of eye gaze and
head motion cues for lane change intent prediction,” in Proc. IEEE Intell.
Veh. Symp., 2008.
[25] E. Murphy-Chutorian and M. M. Trivedi, “Head pose estimation in com-
puter vision: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 2008.
Anup Doshi (S’03) received the B.S. and M.S. de-
grees in electrical and computer engineering from
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, in 2005.
He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in
the Laboratory for Intelligent and Safe Automobiles,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla.
His research interests include computer vision and
machine learning for applications in driver assistance
and intelligent vehicles, human-computer interfaces,
and surveillance.
Shinko Yuanhsien Cheng (S’05–M’07) received the
Ph.D. from the University of California, San Diego,
La Jolla, in 2007.
He is currently with HRL Laboratories, LLC,
Malibu, CA. His research interests include com-
puter vision systems, human-machine interfaces,
articulated body modeling, volumetric scene recon-
struction, human body pose and structure recovery,
human activity recognition, intelligent transportation
systems, and intelligent vehicles.
Mohan Manubhai Trivedi (S’76–M’79–SM’86) re-
ceived the B.E. degree (with honors) from Birla In-
stitute of Technology and Science, Pilani, India, and
the Ph.D. degree from Utah State University, Logan.
He is a Professor of electrical and computer engi-
neering and the Founding Director of the Computer
Vision and Robotics Research Laboratory, Univer-
sity of California, San Diego (UCSD), La Jolla. He
has established the Laboratory for Intelligent and
Safe Automobiles, UCSD, to pursue a multidiscipli-
nary research agenda. His team is currently pursuing
system-oriented research in distributed video arrays and active vision, omni-
directional vision, human body modeling and movement analysis, face and
affect analysis, and intelligent driver assistance and active safety systems for
automobiles. He regularly serves as a consultant to industry and government
agencies in the United States and abroad.
Prof. Trivedi served as the Editor-in-Chief of the Machine Vision and
Applications Journal from 1996 to 2003 and on the editorial boards of several
other journals. He is currently an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS. He served as the Program
Chair for the IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV 2006) and will serve
as the General Chair for the IEEE IV 2010 in San Diego. He serves on the
Executive Committees of the University of California Digital Media Innovation
Program and of the California Institute for Telecommunication and Information
Technologies [Cal-IT2] as the Leader of the Intelligent Transportation and
Telematics Layer at UCSD. He serves as an Expert Panelist for the Strategic
Highway Research Program (Safety) of the Transportation Research Board of
the National Academy of Sciences. He has an extensive publication record, and
two of his recent papers coauthored with his Ph.D. students have won the Best
Paper Award. He was also a recipient of the Distinguished Alumnus Award
from Utah State University and of the Pioneer Award (Technical Activities)
and the Meritorious Service Award from the IEEE Computer Society.
