--- Page 1 ---
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hihc20
International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction
ISSN: 1044-7318 (Print) 1532-7590 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/hihc20
Adaptive Visual Assistance System for Enhancing
the Driver Awareness of Pedestrians
Vincent Frémont, Minh-Tien Phan & Indira Thouvenin
To cite this article: Vincent Frémont, Minh-Tien Phan & Indira Thouvenin (2019): Adaptive Visual
Assistance System for Enhancing the Driver Awareness of Pedestrians, International Journal of
Human–Computer Interaction, DOI: 10.1080/10447318.2019.1698220
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2019.1698220
Published online: 08 Dec 2019.
Submit your article to this journal 
View related articles 
View Crossmark data

--- Page 2 ---
Adaptive Visual Assistance System for Enhancing the Driver Awareness of
Pedestrians
Vincent Frémont
a, Minh-Tien Phanb, and Indira Thouveninb
aCentrale Nantes, CNRS, UMR 6004, LS2N, Nantes, France; bSorbonne Universités, Université de Technologie de Compiègne, CNRS, UMR 7253,
Heudiasyc, Compiègne, France
ABSTRACT
In the past decade, Pedestrian Collision Warning Systems have been proposed to detect pedestrians and
warn drivers of imminent collision. However, such systems are often limited by eye-off-road and
cognitive overload problems. Head Up displays with augmented reality are being considered as a key
technology for changing drivers’ user experiences. In this paper, we propose a new visual assistance
system that can enhance drivers’ perception by dynamically directing attention to pedestrians to avoid
collisions using Augmented Reality cues. The proposed system takes into account driver behaviors
through vehicle driving signals analysis, in order to warn it at the right moments. To that end, we
statistically model correct and incorrect driver behaviors in situations with pedestrians. Based on this
model, a warning visual metaphor is displayed if unawareness is detected and a driving simulator was
used to evaluate the concept. The experimental results suggest that our proposed adaptive visual aids
can enhance driver awareness of pedestrians in critical situations.
1. Introduction
Pedestrians are considered to be among the most vulnerable
road users while also being unpredictable and difficult to
observe in both day-and nighttime conditions. A report
from (WHO, 2013) stated that half of the world’s road traffic
deaths occur among pedestrians, cyclists, and motorcyclists.
In high-income countries, pedestrian fatalities are relatively
low but still represent a large societal and economic cost. In
developing countries such as India and China, the problem is
much worse, as cars, buses, and trucks share the roads with
large numbers of two-and three-wheelers, bicyclists, and
pedestrians as presented in Mock, Quansah, Krishnan,
Arreola-Risa,
and
Rivara
(2004)
and
Mohan
(2002).
Pedestrian safety is therefore a major motivation for research
by the scientific community and the automobile industry.
Several car suppliers currently equip their vehicles with spe-
cific Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) known as
Pedestrian Collision Warning Systems (PCWS) (see Ahmadi
& Machiani, 2019; Dagan, Mano, Stein, & Shashua, 2004).
Such systems detect pedestrians in front of the car, calculate
the time to collision, and warn the driver if the collision is
imminent.
However,
engineering
such
systems
without
understanding driver attention states and driving styles can
make them extremely distracting and annoying when detect-
ing pedestrians. Moreover, head-down-displays mounted on
the dashboard require the driver to turn their head and shift
their gaze to identify the problem, augmenting the danger and
cognitive overload (Gandhi & Trivedi, 2007).
Head-Up Displays (HUD) in cars become a great opportunity
for a wide range of Augmented Reality (AR) applications. The
work of Gabbard, Fitch, and Kim (2014) focused on navigation
support to display navigational hints in the field of view of the
driver. This helps to decrease the time drivers spend looking at
dashboard displays rather than the road. AR applications were
further studied using simulators in Charissis and Papanastasiou
(2011), Kim and Dey (2009) and Schall, Rusch, and Lee (2013)
with promising results in the support of elder drivers. The AR
was found to be able to direct driver attention in critical situa-
tions without distraction. In Fisher and Tan (1989) and Jonides
(1981), the authors found that a “dynamic blinking” cue used for
highlighting can also be effective for attracting attention. In Yeh
and Wickens (2001), the authors studied the effects of cue
reliability and image realism on attention allocation. They
demonstrated that cueing aided target detection in an aviation
visual task and that target detection accuracy can be enhanced
when object cues are not conspicuous. In another experiment
proposed in Rusch et al. (2013), the authors showed that such
AR cues did not interfere with the perception of non-target
objects or with driver performance. They also confirmed that
highlighting cue alerts helped to direct driver attention to poten-
tial hazards. In scenarios with pedestrians, if the driver notices
the pedestrian, carefully analyzes the situation, and chooses
correctly to stop or pass by the pedestrian safely, they are
considered to be aware of the pedestrian (Cases 1 and 2 in
Figure 1b). If not, they are considered to be unaware of the
pedestrian (Case 3 in Figure 1b). Cases of unawareness can
include a lack of perception of the pedestrian or perception
CONTACT Vincent Frémont
vincent.fremont@ec-nantes.fr
Centrale Nantes, CNRS, UMR 6004, LS2N, 1 rue de la Noë, Nantes, France.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in the article can be found online at www.tandfonline.com/hihc.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2019.1698220
© 2019 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC

--- Page 3 ---
that occurs too late for reaction. Most of the time, however,
unawareness occurs when the driver underestimates the risk of
the given situation (see Figure 1a).
In this paper, a visual assistance system that uses AR cues
to enhance driver vigilance is proposed. This work focuses on
situations in which driver attention is directed to pedestrians
by analyzing and guiding driver behavior in specific situa-
tions. Using the driving signals such as the vehicle speed, the
acceleration pedal position, the braking force, the steering
wheel angle and the Time-To-Collision, a supervised learning
approach is proposed to determine if the driver is probably
aware or unaware of a pedestrian. Then, based on this driver
state estimation an AR metaphor containing a bounding box
and a warning panel is displayed to enhance the driver’s
awareness of the pedestrian in a virtual environment. An
experiment involving 23 participants using the driving simu-
lator was carried out to analyze the benefits of the proposed
adaptive visual aid system in a virtual environment.
The main contributions of the paper are as follows.
●We explore the global scope of learning-based gen-
erative models for driver awareness of pedestrian
using only driving signals and multivariate Hidden
Markov models;
●Based on this original driver’s awareness of the pedes-
trian estimation, we propose a new HMI design
through virtual and augmented reality cues, evaluated
with 25 participants;
●We conducted an extensive review of the relevant
state-of-the-art approaches in the field of driver
awareness and HMI design through virtual and aug-
mented reality;
●To better analyze the benefits of adaptive visual aids,
we propose and implement an intelligent AR config-
uration, called iAR, where both the DAP/DUP classi-
fication and the critical situations are taken into
account for metaphors display. In that way, the visual
aids are displayed only when the driver is determined
to be unaware of a pedestrian.
The paper is organized in five sections. The first section is
used to present the model of driver behavior in situations with
pedestrians. In the second section, the proposed visual aids for
uses in augmented reality are described. In the third section,
the experiments, driving simulator, simulated HUD, experi-
mental
protocol,
and
data
collection
methodology
are
described. The fourth section presents statistical results sup-
porting the proposed approach. A discussion and conclusion
are then given in final section.
2. Driver’s behaviors modeling in situations with
a pedestrian
In this paper, the main contribution is the design of
a supervised learning approach that estimates the driver
awareness of a situation using only the driving signals such
as the vehicle speed, the acceleration pedal position, the
Figure 1. Use cases with a pedestrian.
Figure 2. Proposed conceptual model for estimating driver awareness of a pedestrian.
2
V. FRÉMONT ET AL.

--- Page 4 ---
braking force, the steering wheel angle and the Time-To-
Collision. Here, we do not consider eye-off-road issues using
for example, gaze tracking information in our model.
2.1. Related works
In the driver’s inattention research field, potential direct mea-
sures such as physiological signals sensors (Akin, Kurt, Sezgin,
& Bayram, 2008; Wesley, Shastri, & Pavlidis, 2010) and visual
behaviors observation (Bergasa, Nuevo, Barea, & Lopez, 2008;
Doshi & Trivedi, 2012; Lin, Tan, Chua, Tey, & Ang, 2012) can
be used to detect the degree of driver attention or distraction.
In Imamura, Yamashita, Bin Othman, Zhang, and Miyake
(2008) and Ueno, Kaneda, and Tsukino (1994), driver drowsi-
ness was indirectly detected through vehicle speed, steering
wheel motion, lateral position, and acceleration pedal states.
In 2004, the projects conducted by Human Machine and the
Safety of Traffic in Europe (HASTE) (Ostlund et al., 2004)
demonstrated that changes from baseline in steering position
measurements are significantly affected by the visual task. In
Jensen, Wagner, and Alexander (2011), the authors also pro-
posed a combination of three analysis methods to evaluate the
driver’s performance: data threshold violations, phase plane
analysis with limits and a recurrence plot with outlier limits.
The advantages of such measurements are that they are unob-
trusive, easy to obtain, and quite precise.
2.2. Conceptual model
To the best of our knowledge, there are no studies that are
directly related to the estimation of the driver unawareness of
pedestrian or other traffic events. The most closely related
works are those of Fukagawa and Yamada (2013) who pro-
posed a hypothesis that is likely linked to our work. Their
study was based on the driver’s operational data such as
pressure on the accelerator pedal, pressure on the brake
pedal (called acceleration reaction), steering angle and vehicle
behavior data such as vehicle speed to estimate the driver’s
awareness of pedestrian. In our driving simulator, we chose to
use the following 4 driving signals, since due to technical
limitations, the head/gaze tracking signals were not available.
Therefore, in this paper, the considered signals for driver
awareness of pedestrian estimation (see Figure 2), are the
following:
●The vehicle speed, denoted as v in km h−1;
●The acceleration pedal position, denoted as a, which is
normalized to values in the range ½0; 1, where values of
0 and 1 correspond, respectively, to the driver comple-
tely releasing and completely pressing the accelerator
pedal;
●The braking force, denoted as b, with values ranging
from ½0; 400 (Newton Unit –N);
●The steering wheel angle, denoted as s with values ran-
ging from ½π; π radian .
●The TTC in seconds, representing the relationship
between the distance to a pedestrian and the speed of
the vehicle, is also considered. TTC is the most well-
known time-based safety indicator. The TTC is calcu-
lated as TTC ¼
d
vvp
j
j . Where v and vp are the vehicle
current speed and the pedestrian speed respectively, d is
the distance between the vehicle and the pedestrian.
2.3. Learning the driver’s behavior from driving signals
To formalize the problem into a classification approach, the
driving signals are first collected into a vector at each instant j,
as follows:
Oj ¼ ½aj; bj; sj; vj; TTCjT
(1)
A temporal data sequence of several vectors OðjÞ is then used
as a learning model input, making the total input:
Vi ¼ ½Oi; Oiþ1; :::; Oiþh:TwT
(2)
where Tw is the sequence time window and h:Tw is the
sequence size in terms of data points for which h is the sensor
frequency calculated in ð1=HzÞ. As proposed and detailed in
Phan, Fremont, Thouvenin, Sallak, and Cherfaoui (2015) and
Phan, Frémont, Thouvenin, Sallak, and Cherfaoui (2014),
driver behavior in situations involving a pedestrian can be
considered as a Hidden Markov process with N distinct states
S ¼ S1; S2; :::; SN
f
g. At each time step j for a state Si, we can
observe a 5-dimensional vector Oj composed of the driving
signals presented in the previous section. The main originality
of the proposed approach is to use a discrete HMM to classify
the DUP and the DAP. As proposed in Phan et al. (2015), and
using the driving actions, two Gaussian-Mixture-HMMs, one
for the DAP and the other for the DUP, are used to classify
the driver’s behavior. The problem of DAP or DUP detection
can then be formulated as a classification problem (see
Figure 3).
The behavior classification is working as follows. Two
HMM models, λDAP and λDUP, that represent the DAP and
DUP models, are learned from two observation sequences
(driving signals) VDAP and VDUP, Using the expectation-
maximization (EM) algorithm (Bilmes et al., 1998). Next,
given a new sequence of driving signals, V, the forward algo-
rithm (Rabiner, 1989) is applied to λDAP and λDUP to calculate
the posterior probabilities PðVjλDAPÞ and PðVjλDUPÞ, respec-
tively. Finally, the likelihood ratio for this classifier, PðV;λDUPÞ
PðV;λDAPÞ ,
is calculated to determine whether the driver is likely to be
aware or unaware of a pedestrian. A threshold eτth is appro-
priately selected to adjust the performance of the DAP/DUP
classification. As shown in Figure 3, if the likelihood ratio is
greater than eτth, the considered driving signals sequence V is
classified as DUP; if not, it is classified as DAP.
2.4. Model training
2.4.1. Data collection
A driving simulator was used to obtain training data (see
Figure 4). The user interface of the driving simulator contains
a driver seat, a steering wheel, three real pedals, and a clutch
kit. 3D images, sound, and interactions between the driver
and the simulator interface are piloted using SCANeR Studio
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
3

--- Page 5 ---
software(Oktal, 2015). 10 active drivers (7 men and 3 women)
were invited to participate to the study over 10 days. They
were asked to drive the simulator as they would drive a real
car through predefined scenarios. The driving tests were
administered at randomly selected times during the day. The
average age of the participants was 24 years (ranging from 20
to 28).
The main idea here, is to characterize for each driver state
DAP and DUP, representative driving data for learning the
HMM model. For that purpose, two driving scenarios were
designed to represent both DAP and DUP states. For the DAP
one, pedestrians appeared in various sections of the driving
simulation environment. Before each driving session, the dri-
vers are encouraged to avoid collisions with pedestrians, and
a message giving the distance to the next pedestrian is dis-
played in the bottom-center of the simulator screen through-
out the driving time. Furthermore, the driver is asked to press
a button on the right-hand side of the steering wheel to
indicate that they noticed a pedestrian. If the driver did not
collide with a pedestrian during their session, he is considered
to be DAP. For the DUP data collection scenario, the same
scenarios as in the DAP simulation with neither messages nor
button-pressing tasks, were proposed. However, since it is
very complicated to provoke unawareness of the driver, arti-
ficial collisions were done by masking the pedestrian (making
it invisible for the driver) in the simulation environment. In
this way, the driver cannot see any pedestrian, and is then
artificially unaware of them. So, if the simulator detected any
collisions with the “invisible” pedestrians, the driver was con-
sidered to be DUP. Since we conducted experiments using
a simulator, the DUP considers the unawareness as coming
from the environment and not from the driver. In this case,
we could talk about ?Artificial Unawareness? that is to say that
the driver is prevented from seeing the pedestrian, this is not
unawareness but a nonevent. As we use a simulator, we can
only do “Reduced Virtuality”, since in that case we can hide
elements from the driver and measure its state. To simplify
our reporting here, we refer to the two scenarios as DAP and
DUP, respectively.
During the driving assessments, driving data were auto-
matically and synchronously logged at 20 onto a hard-disk
without filtering or smoothing processing. In each DAP driv-
ing scenario, the driving data was recorded starting at the
time at which the driver pressed the button to the time that
Figure 3. Decision process architecture based on two hidden Markov models representing the DUP and the DAP, respectively. The likelihood ratio is used to classify
each new observation.
Figure 4. Driving simulator used for manipulating driver awareness of pedestrians.
4
V. FRÉMONT ET AL.

--- Page 6 ---
the vehicle passed by or stopped in front of the pedestrian.
The same time periods were used to extract data in the DUP
driving scenarios, although in these scenarios only driving
sessions
in
which
collisions
with
invisible
pedestrians
occurred were recorded. In this manner, we were able to
extract and annotate DAP and DUP behavior, and we ulti-
mately obtained 2,500 DAP sequences and 1,500 DUP
sequences, which were used in the k  fold cross-validation
with k ¼ 4 in the algorithm learning step.
There were some differences between the DAP and the
DUP behavior that were readily apparent. Some driver reac-
tions,
such
as
decelerating
then
braking
in
front
of
a pedestrian or turning the steering wheel, appeared to
occur when avoiding and then passing the pedestrian. For
example, in Figure 5a, the driver releases the accelerator
pedal at 5s of TTC and at 2s of TTC and begins to break.
On the other hand, in the DUP manipulations none of these
reactions occurred during the same time periods (see
Figure 5b).
We then applied overlapping-sliding-windows of size Tw
to segment the data into sequences. The Tw parameter had to
be carefully chosen to capture the characteristics of the
respective behaviors; setting Tw too long could result in too
much noise and can lead to over-fitting, while setting Tw too
short can lose vital relevant features from the observations.
A grid search technique associated with 4  fold cross-
validation (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012) and receiver operation
characteristic curves (Metz, 1978) was used to determine the
optimal parameters of the models. A False Positive Rate (FPR)
of 5% was chosen to be in accordance with automotive
industry standards as the minimum requirement of the secur-
ity application value. All combinations of the HMM model
parameters were tested to determine the best model para-
meters for optimizing performance. The decision threshold
τh was defined by maximizing the True Positive Rate (TPR)
for a given FPR. Thus, the final chosen parameters were:
N ¼ 10, M=2, Tw ¼ 1:5 s, and τth ¼ 214. This combination
gives the best classification performance with a TPR of 84.2%.
2.5. Visual aids display decisions
Based on the driver’s unawareness estimation proposed above,
another contribution of this paper is to create and to evaluate
AR aids to warn the driver in critical situations. Two visual
aids are chosen: a bounding box around the pedestrian and
a warning panel (see Figure 6). The display decision com-
prises a definition of the rules for executing these visual aids.
The warning panel is displayed only when a detected situa-
tion is considered dangerous or prior to a critical moment. In
the first stage, we consider using the time-to-collision (TTC)
to determine how dangerous a situation is. Thus, we define
the critical TTC (TTCcriticalÞ to represent the amount of time
the driver is given to react after being warned that he is in
a potential collision with a pedestrian, and we further define
the critical distance (dcritical) as a safety net. In most cases, the
TTCcritical is given first but, for some cases in which the vehicle
approaches a pedestrian with a low speed, the TTCcritical is met
when the vehicle is too close to the pedestrian. To address this
gap, the dcritical is calculated as follows:
dcritical ¼ vveh  TTCcritical
(3)
For example, when the vehicle speed (vveh) is about 30km h−1
(8.3m s−1) and the TTCcritical is found at 2s, the distance is
equal to 16.6m, which is already too close to the pedestrian; in
this case, dcritical should be taken into account first. The critical
moment (CM) is then defined as a function of the critical
distance (dcritical) to the pedestrian and the TTCcritical between
the vehicle and the pedestrian. As in Aoude, Desaraju,
Stephens, and How (2012) and McLaughlin, Hankey, and
Dingus
(2008),
the
choice
of
TTCcritical
is
based
on
a cumulative human response time distribution. This distri-
bution answers the following question: Given a specific driver
response time, what percentage of the population will be able
to react to a potential collision?
Generally, for a larger response time a higher percentage of
the population will be able to react in time to a warning;
paradoxically, however, higher response times are expected
to lead to worse performance under warnings because they
can become annoying to a driver. Table 1 gives the distribu-
tion of the cumulative human response distribution at 1.0s,
1.6s, and 2.0s, corresponding to 45%, 80%, and 90% of the
population, respectively.
2.6. Visual aids configurations
To better analyze and highlight the benefits of adaptive visual
aids in terms of distraction and cognitive overload, we tested
two different configurations. The first one is a basic config-
uration (named Augmented Reality or AR) in which, the
visual cues are displayed whenever the pedestrian is detected,
Figure 5. DAP and DUP data samples.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
5

--- Page 7 ---
the second one is an intelligent configuration (named intelli-
gent Augmented Reality or iAR), in which, the visual cues are
displayed in function of the critical moments (see Table 2). In
the AR configuration, the bounding box is displayed when-
ever a pedestrian is detected in front of the vehicle and the
warning panel is displayed when a critical moment is detected
(i.e., 2s of TTC). In the iAR configuration, the rules are the
same as in the AR configuration, except that both the DAP/
DUP classification and the critical moments are taken into
account. The aids are displayed only when the driver is
determined to be unaware of a pedestrian (see Figure 7).
It is crucial to note that, the reliability plays an important role
in the automation systems. Trust of in-vehicle technology is
linked to warning system reliability and sensitivity settings.
High False Alarm (FA) rates associated with high sensitivity,
can reduce driver trust in the alerting system and annoy the
driver. It can lead to failure of benefit from the warnings and
overall increase in driver errors. In our proposed system, the AR
configuration will display the cues with 100% of reliability
because of the perfection of the pedestrian detection in the
virtual environment. Whereas, in the iAR configuration, the
Figure 6. The proposed visual cues.
Table 1. Response time population distribution.
TTCcritical(s)
dcriticalðmÞ
Population percentage
1.0
8.3
45%
1.6
13.3
80%
2.0
16.6
90%
Table 2. Three configurations of the proposed visual aids system.
Configuration
Bounding Box Activation
Bounding Box Deactivation
noAR
No
No
AR
Pedestrian Detected
No Pedestrian
iAR
DUP detected
DAP detected
Panel Activation
Panel Deactivation
noAR
No
No
AR
Critical Moment (CM)
No CM or no Pedestrian
iAR
DUP Detected at CM
DAP detected or no CM
Figure 7. System architecture for intelligent Augmented Reality (iAR) configuration.
6
V. FRÉMONT ET AL.

--- Page 8 ---
reliability of the display decision is strongly related to the relia-
bility of the DAP/DUP classification. Indeed, The DAP/DUP
classification has been validated in Section 2.4 and has proven to
be at a level of 84.2% of reliability. However, in our case, this
result has not been validated on a large number of participants
and scenarios. Therefore, it is difficult to predict the real benefits
of the iAR configuration through a proper statistical analysis.
Both configurations have been implemented on a driving simu-
lator and an experiment has been set up in order to evaluate the
effect of these configurations both in terms of objective and
subjective results.
3. Experiments
3.1. Outcome measures
In this paper, we hypothesized that the systems with AR and
iAR configurations would enhance the driver’s vigilance rela-
tive to the noAR configuration. Moreover, we expected that
the driver’s awareness model is accurate enough (as shown in
Section 2.4) and that the iAR could more successfully warn
drivers at the right moment to ensure better performance
during the driving task than in the AR configuration.
In the proposed experiments, independent variable includes
the assistance configuration, pedestrian situations, the head
vehicle’s behaviors and the participants. The following outcome
measures are dependent variables and they are associated with
driver awareness of pedestrians and with driver performance.
3.1.1. The outcome measures associated with driver
awareness of pedestrians
●The Visual Reaction Time (VRT) is the moment (calcu-
lated as a TTC) at which the driver notices the pedes-
trian and presses the button. This outcome represents
the visual attention of the driver and it should be as
larger as possible meaning that the driver noticed the
pedestrian sooner. We expected that the AR and iAR
configurations
would
enhance
pedestrian
visibility,
allowing the driver to notice pedestrians sooner with
AR aids.
●The Accelerator Pedal Position (APP) was analyzed. We
expected that the driver would be more vigilant when
using the visual aids, resulting in smaller APP values in
the AR and iAR configurations than in the noAR
configuration.
●We also calculated the number of times the driver
braked urgently, (Urgent Braking – UB). We hypothe-
sized that the driver would perform more urgent brak-
ing under the noAR configuration than under the AR
configurations. We expected that the use of visual aids
(AR and iAR configurations)would improve driver
anticipation of pedestrians suddenly crossing the road.
3.1.2. The outcome measures associated with driver
performance
●The Head Vehicle Distance (HVD) was analyzed. We
expected that the driver would be more efficient with
iAR and would maintain shorter distances to the head
vehicle than under the AR configuration.
3.1.3. Subjective measurement
In addition to the above objective outcomes, we also wrote
a questionnaire containing 10 main questions and asking the
participants their personal opinions on the benefits of the AR
cues and on the system in general during their driving task.
The questionnaires were filled out at the end of the test.
3.2. Proposed experimental protocol
To evaluate the three configurations (noAR, AR, iAR), the
drivers are first cognitively engaged in a specific driving task,
the head vehicle-following. Then critical situations with
pedestrians are randomly generated and the outcome mea-
sures presented above are evaluated.
3.2.1. Driving task principle
During the driving test, a head vehicle-following task was
assigned to each driver as a primary task as proposed in
Rusch et al. (2013). The participants had to maintain
a constant distance from a head vehicle. At certain road points,
pedestrians appears with the intention of crossing the road in
front of the vehicle. This head vehicle-following task made the
experience more representative of typical driving situations and
engaged drivers so that the perception of pedestrians would be
more difficult or easier to dismiss by the driver.
In the experiment, the head vehicle accelerated when it
entered into pedestrian situations and passed the pedestrians
before the participant’s vehicle did. It was presumed that the
participants would also accelerate at this point to catch up
with the head vehicle. Furthermore, the pedestrians on the
side walk were capable to randomly cross the road at any
moment. The participants therefore had to make correct
decisions between maintaining their separation distance
from the head vehicle and lifting up off the accelerator at
the pedestrian crossing (see Figure 8). The drivers perfor-
mance in the head vehicle following tasks and their reactions
in avoiding accidents with the pedestrians were then mea-
sured to evaluate the performance of the visual aids.
3.2.2. Designed scenarios
For all configuration (noAR, AR, iAR), 23 pedestrians were placed
at the same position on the circuit to create 23 critical situations.
So to limit the learning effect between the driving sequences, the
pedestrian appearance and behaviors are randomly varying. So for
each critical situation, the pedestrian has the same position but it
can be a man or a woman, an adult or a child, with diversified
clothes colors and it can perform different activities (walking,
running, or standing on the sidewalk) randomly generated. The
critical situation begins at a distance of 140 from the pedestrian
and finishes when both vehicles passed by the pedestrian (see
Figure 9a). When the test vehicle enters the critical situation, the
head vehicle increases its speed by 4, 6, 8, or 10 km h−1 and quickly
passes by the pedestrian (see Figure 9b). The acceleration value is
chosen randomly to limit the repetition effect. If the distance
between the test vehicle and the pedestrian reaches 40m, the
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
7

--- Page 9 ---
pedestrian turns and indicates that they intend to cross the road
and, in some cases, actually crosses (see Figure 9c). Figure 9d
shows a scene from the driver’s point of view at this moment.
When both vehicles have passed the pedestrian, the head vehicle
decelerates until the distance between the two vehicle reaches 50m
prior to initiating a new situation with the next pedestrian. Prior
Figure 8. The head vehicle-following task and situations with a pedestrian.
Figure 9. The proposed scenario with the lead vehicle-following task and a pedestrian crossing the road.
8
V. FRÉMONT ET AL.

--- Page 10 ---
to the driving test, the participant is warned that the pedestrians
are vulnerable and can cross the road at any moment even if there
is no crossing mark.
3.2.3. Apparatus and participants
To evaluate the proposed system under different display deci-
sions, an experiment has been carried out using the driving
simulator introduced in the previous section. The experimen-
tal trial involved 23 subjects. All of the participants had at
least 3 years of licensed driving and were familiar with the
simulator. Moreover, none of the participants had any eye
problems or other physical diminutions. They ranged in age
from 21 to 35 years old; 19 subjects were male and 4 were
female. Because the subjects were not paid for participating,
the sample primarily included only university students, that is
obviously a limitation for the evaluation.
3.2.4. Procedure
The experimental procedure comprises a platform familiariza-
tion phase and a testing phase.
Before starting the experiment, each participant receives an
explanation of the purpose of the study and provides consent.
Prior to the drive, the participant is allowed to adjust the seat,
steering wheel, and mirrors for comfort. They are then
instructed on how to control the simulator. To simplify man-
euvering by the participant, the vehicle is simulated with an
automatic gearbox. We indicate which buttons start and stop
the platform, the vehicle pedals and the button they should
press whenever they notice a pedestrian.
The participant then engages in two practice sessions. In the
first, the participant drives freely to become familiar with the
platform. In this driving sequence, they are instructed to adjust
the speed to accelerate to 100 km h−1 or to stop in front of
a crossing mark. The participant is also asked to estimate the
vehicle speed. The session ends when the participant provides an
accurate answer regarding the actual speed without looking at
the dashboard, which is displayed at the upper left corner of the
screen. In the second practice session, the participant is trained
to perform the task of following the head vehicle. During this
session, the instructor trains the driver to maintain a distance of
about 50 m from the head vehicle. There are no pedestrians in
the practice sessions, the goal of which is to train participants in
the driving task without using the dashboard, which can influ-
ence the effect of the visual cues. When the participants feel that
they are familiar with the task, the formal testing begins.
The testing phase comprises 3 driving sequences. Each
sequence takes between 15 and 20 minutes, and all three
sequences occur on the same circuit, but traffic elements of
interest such as the head vehicle’s behavior, the pedestrians’
appearance and their activity (crossing by walking, crossing
by running, or standing on the sidewalk) randomly change
between tests to eliminate the learning effects. However, due
to simulator limitations, the pedestrian geographic positions
on the circuit, remain the same.
Moreover, for each driving sequence, the HUD configuration
is randomly chosen by the instructor using a counterbalanced
design: one driving with no visual assistance (noAR configura-
tion), one with AR aids and one with iAR ones. By changing the
order of the configuration between participants, we were able to
counterbalance the learning and repetition effects in the overall
data set collected from the participants.
4. Results
In the validation step, we considered the mean of each out-
come over the sets of participants and pedestrian situations.
The differences between the three configurations (noAR, AR,
and iAR) were exposed using one-way ANalysis Of VAriance
(ANOVA)
tools.
Following
up
using
Tukey’s
Honest
Significant Difference (Tukey’s HSD) test allowed us to spe-
cify the configuration with the most varied outcomes. The
ANOVA testing enabled us to see how effective the differ-
ences between driving with and without visual aids was in
term of the driver awareness of pedestrians.
4.1. Objective results
4.1.1. The outcomes associated with the driver awareness
of pedestrians
4.1.1.1. AR followed by iAR configurations increase signifi-
cantly the visual reaction times. As mentioned previously, this
outcome is measured by calculating the TTC at the moment when
the driver presses the button to indicate that he has noticed
a pedestrian in front of the vehicle. For all the experiments (driv-
ing sequences and aids configurations), only 14 participants fol-
lowed this specific instruction: “to press the button when seeing
a pedestrian”. Therefore we decided to remove the 9 bad answers
linked to the VRT and for that point only, the statistics have been
done for 14 participants. The VRT corresponds to the perception
level of the DAP. Figure 10a shows the VRT results for each of the
23 pedestrian situations and for the 14 participants that followed
correctly the instruction. Figure 10b shows the mean values of
VRT over the three configurations for all pedestrian scenarios.
The ANOVA results confirmed a statistically significant difference
between
the
noAR,
AR,
and
iAR
configurations
ðFð2; 963Þ ¼ 18:74; p < 0:05Þ, and Tukey’s HSD test revealed
that, in the noAR configuration, the drivers noticed pedestrians
significantly later when the vehicle was at around 3s of TTC to the
pedestrian. Moreover, there was no significant difference between
the AR and iAR configurations, since the drivers noticed the
pedestrians at 4:5 and 4:2s of TTC respectively.
Figure 10a shows that the VRT values for the different
pedestrian situations. This is certainly a result of the differ-
ences between road situations, pedestrian behaviors, or
latency when pressing the button. However, in each situation
the drivers noticed the pedestrian soonest under the AR con-
figuration, followed by iAR and then noAR.
4.1.1.2. The iAR configuration reduces aggressive accelera-
tions. In each pedestrian situation, the drivers were found to
accelerate more aggressively when there was no visual assistance
(the noAR configuration) (see Figure 11a). The ANOVA results
confirmed the difference of APP among the three configurations
ðFð2; 1722Þ ¼ 9:11; p < 0:05Þ. The Tukey’s HSD test results
revealed that the drivers pressed the accelerator pedal most
deeply under noAR (mean equal to 0:46), see Figure 11b.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
9

--- Page 11 ---
Moreover, there was also a small difference of APP between the
AR and iAR configurations.
4.1.1.3. The AR configuration reduces urgent braking.
Braking is considered to be urgent whenever the measured
force applied to the pedal is greater than 200N at a TTC
smaller than 2s.
Across all of the driving tests, 72, 11, and 26 urgent braking
were detected under the noAR, AR, and iAR configurations,
respectively. This result suggests that the AR configuration
had
the
most
influence
on
the
drivers’
anticipation
in situations with pedestrians. Under the iAR configuration,
the bounding box was displayed and removed as a function of
the DAP/DUP detection in a manner that was rather quiet.
Thus, the missed detection of a DUP could lead to the non-
display of cues and could consequently lead to urgent braking
when the driver was unaware of a pedestrian. Moreover,
whenever cues were removed when a DAP was detected, the
drivers tended to think that the danger had disappeared and
became less aware of the pedestrian. As a consequence, when
the pedestrians crossed the road the drivers had to brake
urgently to avoid accidents.
4.1.2. Outcome associated with driving performances
4.1.2.1. The noAR configuration gives best performance for
head vehicle distance (shortest). Graphically, the head vehicle-
following task was performed best with no AR, in which case it
was observed that the drivers maintained the shortest distances to
the head vehicle because they were concentrating more closely on
the task when there were no aids (see Figure 12a). The ANOVA
results revealed significant differences in HVD among the three
configurations ðFð2; 1722Þ ¼ 4:87; p < 0:05Þ. The Tukey’s HSD
test results confirmed that, under the AR configuration, the dri-
vers were less concerned with maintaining their distance from the
head vehicle (118m), See Figure 12b. The test also revealed that the
drivers performed similarly under the iAR and noAR cases.
4.2. Subjective results
Table 3 provides the subjective questions asked after each
driving test under the iAR configuration with adaptive visual
aids. The subjective feedbacks confirm the objective results
presented in Table 4 and highlight the overall user experience
during the experiments. The results primarily confirmed the
advantage of the iAR configuration over classical AR cues. In
particular, the adaptive behavior of the iAR configuration is
positively appreciated by the participants (82%) especially
during a specific driving task requiring concentration. The
bounding box was found useful for directing driver attention
to pedestrians (74%) that corresponds to better visual reaction
time while reducing aggressive accelerations (question Q02 –
72%). Moreover, the adaptive nature of the iAR does not
degrade the head vehicle distance and gives similar awareness
to pedestrian than the full AR cue (question Q07). All of the
participants agreed that they had driven in a manner similar
to real life (emphquestion Q04). This demonstrated that the
drivers felt comfortable with the simulator and the adaptive
nature of iAR was not disturbing and distressing. Concerning
Figure 10. Visual reaction times.
Figure 11. Accelerator pedal position.
10
V. FRÉMONT ET AL.

--- Page 12 ---
the focusing task, the head vehicle-following mission was
considered to be quite difficult (question Q05), with 87% of
the participants answering ≪difficult≫, and they commented
that the difficulty arose when the head vehicle reacted too
spontaneously. This last point is due to the simulator limita-
tion in controlling the head vehicle. However, 83% of drivers
answered that they had tried to catch the head vehicle (ques-
tion Q03) and 82% had been aware of pedestrians (answered
as ≪normal≫or ≪completely≫) showing that both the
driving task and the adaptive AR were efficient and without
stress (100%). For questions concerning the iAR configura-
tion, all participants answered that they would like to use
a HUD in their own cars and most of them (82%) highlight-
ing the efficiency of the iAR configuration (question Q10) in
terms of distraction and cognitive overload. On the other
hand, 74% of the participants preferred the bounding box
cue to the pedestrian panel one (question Q09). They argued
that the bounding box helped them to identify where the
pedestrian was, while the pedestrian panel forces them to
break (73%) and they were not sure if it was an appropriate
response (question Q09).
5. Discussion and conclusion
5.1. Augmented reality aids have benefits in driver
assistance systems
This study investigated the potential benefits of using
Augmented Reality in driving conditions to enhance drivers
attention in situations involving pedestrians. The use of AR
aids is expected to enhance driver situational awareness to
road users and especially to pedestrians. In this paper, we
focused on the adaptive feature of the AR cues. In this con-
text, the bounding box was found useful for directing driver
attention to pedestrians. This is consistent with the work of
Schall et al., (2013) and Rusch et al., (2013), who found that
bounding boxes can direct driver attention into hazardous
events such as pedestrians or road signs. Moreover, our accel-
erator pedal position analysis showed that the presence of
a bounding box forced the drivers to slow down and be
more vigilant to pedestrians. On the other hand, the manner
in which the panel warned the drivers to brake if the situation
became critical inducing more urgent braking in front of
pedestrians.
Because driving is a visual and motor control process, it is
possible that the visual search associated with information
retrieval from the aid display degraded driving task perfor-
mance. In Dzindolet, Pierce, Beck, and Dawe (2002), the
author highlighted that automation of human aids can cause
comparable
levels
of
distraction
in
driver
navigation.
However, it is also important to remark on the differences
between conformal and non-conformal aids: non-conformal
aids distract more than conformal aids. Non-conformal aids
such as warning panels employ enclosed, non-changing, and
opaque rhombus shapes, making it difficult for the driver to
discriminate between information on targets (pedestrians) on
which the aids are highlighted. After our experiments, the
participants also commented on this problem. By contrast,
the participants commented that the conformal aids (such as
Figure 12. Head vehicle distance.
Table 3. Some significant questions asked in the questionnaire.
Questions
Result
Q01 Do you think you have braked unnecessarily? (never-
sometimes-several times)
27%-52%-
21%
Q02 Did you accelerate at maximum? (never-sometimes-always)
1%-72%-
17%
Q03 Are you trying to catch the head vehicle? (yes-no)
83%-17%
Q04 Do you perform the driving like in real conditions? (yes-no)
100%-0%
Q05 How is the driving task? (easy-normal-difficult)
3%-10%-
87%
Q06 Were you under stress? (not at all-normal-very)
48%-52%-
0%
Q07 Are you aware of the pedestrians? (completely-normal-not
at all)
30%-52%-
18%
Q08 Would you like to use this combiner HUD? (yes-no)
100%-0%
Q09 Which cue do you prefer? (bounding box-warning panel)
74%-26%
Q10 Is the iAR efficient? (efficient-average-distracting).
82%-18%-
0%
Table 4. Summary of experimental results and comments on iAR configuration.
noAR
AR
iAR
Results on iAR configuration
Awareness of
Pedestrians
Visual Reaction Time
(VRT)
3s
4.5s
4.2s
As good as with AR and better
than noAR
Acceleration Pedal
Reaction (level)
47%
24% 35% Better than noAR but worse
than AR
Urgent Braking (count)
72
11
26
Slightly worse than AR and
better than noAR
Following tasks
performances
Head Vehicle Distance
(m)
82
118
90
Better than AR slightly worse
than noAR
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
11

--- Page 13 ---
the bounding box around the pedestrians) did not produce
any negative masking effects.
5.2. Taking driver awareness into account is crucial
As a supplement to the related work of Arun, Sundaraj, and
Murugappan (2012), we discuss here an additional important
aspect in the design of a new ADAS: The analysis of driver
situational awareness while using the system. Essentially, pre-
vious works subjectively considered driver inattentive states such
as sleepiness, drowsiness, or distraction. Such states are helpful
but not sufficient in the case of an ADAS for pedestrian safety, as
a driver could be in a normal state but, if he underestimates the
danger level of the situation, an accident could still occur. Thus,
our study was dedicated to a deep analysis of driver interaction
with a particular situation involving a pedestrian. Other critical
situations have also been considered, including prior to entering
an intersection or more complex danger scenarios (Aoude et al.,
2012; Plavšić, Klinker, & Bubb, 2010).
In this paper, through the experiments, the participants
were found to be more efficient under the iAR configuration
than under the AR configuration. Most participants commen-
ted that, under the latter configuration, the warning panel
displayed at the appropriate moment, allowing the driver to
maintain a sufficient distance from the leading vehicle while
reacting effectively to the pedestrian; indeed, the results did not
show a significant difference between the iAR and the no AR
configurations in terms of maintaining distance from the lead-
ing vehicle. Moreover, the iAR performed almost as well as the
AR configuration in terms of enhancing pedestrian visibility
and the driver’s awareness of the pedestrian (see Table 4). Thus,
the iAR is a compromise solution that helps to enhance driver
awareness with good vehicle following task performances.
5.3. Limitations
During the experiments, we noticed that the drivers’ reac-
tions varied significantly among situations. In the results
presented above, the variances of the outcomes are quite
important. Indeed, the drivers’ reactions changed for each
pedestrian situation and during the course of the experi-
ments. The drivers tended to display less caution and vigi-
lance when seeing the first few pedestrians along the road;
after two or three pedestrian crossings, they became more
attentive and careful. This behavior arose from the fact the
drivers did not really consider the simulator to be a real
driving situation. This suggests that, in testing with simula-
tors, it is necessary to train the participants and encourage
them to engage in the environment to eliminate unrealistic
effects. This point has been also highlighted in Ahmadi and
Machiani (2019).
Since we only focus on driver awareness of pedestrian, the
low complexities of the scenarios used could create difficulties
in interpreting the results in the iAR configuration. In this case,
the pedestrians were easily perceived, so the visibility enhancing
effect was superfluous for some drivers and some pedestrian
situations. In a previous study of driver distraction (Kass, Cole,
& Stanny, 2007), it was found that impairment (increased VRT)
depends on scene complexity. Also, consistent with the work in
Yeh and Wickens (2001), aids saliency played a central role in
the ability of the participants to detect targets in this work. The
aids helped to ensure that the drivers perceived targets; how-
ever, target visibility also played a role in the ability of partici-
pants to perceive targets. Some pedestrians were visible before
the aid appeared, and therefore in some cases participants
responded even before the aid appeared.
Activation and deactivation of aids can be considered to be
a driver-vehicle-pedestrian interaction model. In this decision
framework, we can take into account the driver’s awareness of
Figure 13. AR cue on real vehicle equipped with a windshield HUD (https://pole-moveo.org/projets/sera/).
12
V. FRÉMONT ET AL.

--- Page 14 ---
a pedestrian and the TTC; however, the decision-making
module did not take into account pedestrian behavior,
which may be crucial for this purpose. It is not necessary to
display aid cues in cases in which a pedestrian has no inten-
tion to cross the road. Thus, the system should take into
account pedestrian behaviors to provide better aid.
5.4. Conclusion
In this paper, an advanced driving assistance system using visual
aids, called AR and iAR, were proposed in the context of
pedestrian safety. We designed systems that highlight pedestrian
presence using a conformal bounding box and warns the driver
of a potential collision using a non-conformal warning panel.
The study highlighted the importance of taking into account the
driver awareness in decision-making. Thus, a model of driver
awareness of pedestrians to estimate if a driver is aware or
unaware of the presence of a pedestrian was proposed, with
decisions on whether to display visual cues taken based on this
awareness model and on TTC information. The results revealed
that a system that takes the driver’s behavior into account will
maintain the performances in the driving task. Moreover, such
cues can help the driver to identify pedestrians sooner and to be
more vigilant of them.
Our findings suggest that adaptive visual aids are promis-
ing (iAR) and merit further investigations to highlight their
potential as a trade-off between full AR and no AR cues for
both driver awareness and efficient driving performances.
A more advanced model might also take into account driver
visual reactions, and the use of an eye/gaze tracker will be
explored in further experiments as proposed in Martin and
Trivedi (2017). The correlation between the direction of dri-
ver gaze to pedestrians and driver reactions will be analyzed to
improve the performance of our system.
At this stage, further experiments are planned with the
simulator used in this study. However, the protocol should
be improved to allow us to measure, both subjectively and
objectively, driver awareness of pedestrians. For example, after
each passing of a pedestrian, the driving test might emit
a buzz and the driver could answer questions concerning the
passing conditions (regarding, for instance, the pedestrian’s
appearance) to evaluate their situational awareness.
A shown in Figure 13, a real vehicle with an windshield
HUD has been developed and tested with our model to
validate the proposed ideas in real driving conditions. In
this platform, cameras are used for obstacle detection and
driver monitoring. Vehicle data from the CAN bus are syn-
chronized with this information. We envision multiple future
directions for the use of this platform. In driver behavior
modeling, the correlation between driver eye fixation or
dynamics and obstacle position will be assessed to enable
prediction of driver behavior prior to entering critical situa-
tions such as roundabouts or pedestrian crossings. Following
a different track, various algorithms including HMM or Deep
Neural Networks will be explored using real driving data.
Furthermore, driver awareness of critical situations will be
studied to evaluate driver distraction while using visual aid
systems with the real vehicle and its windshield HUD.
Acknowledgements
This work was carried out in the framework of the FUI18 SERA project,
and the Labex MS2T which is funded by the French Government,
through the program “ Investments for the future” managed by the
National Agency for Research [Reference ANR-11-IDEX-0004-02].
ORCID
Vincent Frémont
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1627-2241
References
Ahmadi, A., & Machiani, S. G. (2019). Drivers’ performance examination
using a personalized adaptive curve speed warning: Driving simulator
study. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 1–12.
Akin, M., Kurt, M., Sezgin, N., & Bayram, M. (2008). Estimating vigi-
lance level by using eeg and emg signals. Neural Computing and
Applications, 17(3), 227–236. doi:10.1007/s00521-007-0117-7
Aoude, G., Desaraju, V., Stephens, L., & How, J. (2012). Driver behavior
classification at intersections and validation on large naturalistic data
set. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 13(2),
724–736. doi:10.1109/TITS.2011.2179537
Arun, S., Sundaraj, K., & Murugappan, M. (2012). Driver inattention
detection methods: A review. In 2012 IEEE Conference on Sustainable
Utilization
and
Development
in
Engineering
and
Technology
(STUDENT) (pp. 1–6). Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Bergasa, L., Nuevo, M., Barea, R., & Lopez, E. (2008). Visual monitoring
of driver inattention. In D. Prokhorov (Ed.), Computational intelli-
gence
in
automotive
applications
volume
132
of
Studies
in
Computational Intelligence (pp. 19–37). Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Bergstra, J., & Bengio, Y. (2012). Random search for hyper-parameter
optimization. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1),
281–305.
Bilmes, J. A. (1998). A gentle tutorial of the em algorithm and its
application to parameter estimation for gaussian mixture and hidden
markov models. International Computer Science Institute, 4(510), 126.
Charissis, V., & Papanastasiou, S. (2011). Evaluation of collision avoid-
ance
prototype
head-up
display
interface
for
older
drivers.
In
International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (pp.
367–375). Orlando, FL: Springer.
Dagan, E., Mano, O., Stein, G. P., & Shashua, A. (2004). Forward collision
warning with a single camera. In Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 2004
IEEE (pp. 37–42). IEEE. doi:10.1080/13557850410001673987
Doshi, A., & Trivedi, M. M. (2012). Head and eye gaze dynamics during
visual attention shifts in complex environments. Journal of Vision, 12
(2), 9. doi:10.1167/12.2.9
Dzindolet, M. T., Pierce, L. G., Beck, H. P., & Dawe, L. A. (2002). The
perceived utility of human and automated aids in a visual detection
task. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society, 44(1), 79–94. doi:10.1518/0018720024494856
Fisher, D. L., & Tan, K. C. (1989). Visual displays: The highlighting
paradox. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society, 31(1), 17–30. doi:10.1177/001872088903100102
Fukagawa, Y., & Yamada, K. (2013). Estimating driver awareness of
pedestrians from driving behavior based on a probabilistic model. In
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2013 (pp. 1155–1160). Gold
Coast, QLD: IEEE.
Gabbard, J. L., Fitch, G. M., & Kim, H. (2014). Behind the glass: Driver
challenges
and
opportunities
for
ar
automotive
applications.
Proceedings
of
the
IEEE,
102(2),
124–136.
doi:10.1109/
JPROC.2013.2294642
Gandhi, T., & Trivedi, M. (2007). Pedestrian protection systems: Issues,
survey,
and
challenges.
IEEE
Transactions
on
Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 8(3), 413–430. doi:10.1109/TITS.2007.903444
Imamura, T., Yamashita, H., Bin Othman, R., Zhang, Z., & Miyake, T.
(2008). Driving behavior classification river sensing based on vehicle
steering wheel operations. In SICE Annual Conference, 2008 (pp.
2714–2718). Tokyo, Japan.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
13

--- Page 15 ---
Jensen, M., Wagner, J., & Alexander, K. (2011). Analysis of in-vehicle
driver behaviour data for improved safety. International Journal of
Vehicle Safety, 5(3), 197–212. doi:10.1504/IJVS.2011.042850
Jonides, J. (1981). Voluntary versus automatic control over the minn eye
movement. Attention and Performance IX, 9, 187–203.
Kass, S. J., Cole, K. S., & Stanny, C. J. (2007). Effects of distraction and
experience
on
situation
awareness
and
simulated
driving.
Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 10
(4), 321–329. doi:10.1016/j.trf.2006.12.002
Kim, S., & Dey, A. K. (2009). Simulated augmented reality windshield
display as a cognitive mapping aid for elder driver navigation. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing
Systems
(pp.
133–142).
ACM.
doi:10.1177/
1753193408096018
Lin, S. T., Tan, Y. Y., Chua, P. Y., Tey, L. K., & Ang, C. H. (2012). Perclos
threshold for drowsiness detection during real driving. Journal of
Vision, 12(9), 546. doi:10.1167/12.9.546
Martin, S., & Trivedi, M. M. (2017). Gaze fixations and dynamics for
behavior modeling and prediction of on-road driving maneuvers. In
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium Proceedings, Los Angeles, CA.
McLaughlin, S. B., Hankey, J. M., & Dingus, T. A. (2008). A method for
evaluating collision avoidance systems using naturalistic driving data.
Accident
Analysis
&
Prevention,
40(1),
8–16.
doi:10.1016/j.
aap.2007.03.016
Metz, C. E. (1978). Basic principles of roc analysis. Seminars in Nuclear
Medicine, 8, 283–298. Elsevier. doi:10.1016/S0001-2998(78)80014-2
Mock, C., Quansah, R., Krishnan, R., Arreola-Risa, C., & Rivara, F. (2004).
Strengthening the prevention and care of injuries worldwide. The
Lancet, 363(9427), 2172–2179. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(04)16510-0
Mohan, D. (2002). Work trips and safety of bicyclists. Indian Journal of
Transport Management, 26(2), 225–233.
Oktal. (2015). Driving simulation engine scaner. Retrieved from http://
www.scanersimulation.com
Ostlund, J., Nilsson, L., Carsten, O., Merat, N., Jamson, H., Jamson, S., …
Anttila, V. (2004). Hmi and safety-related driver performance.
ScienceOpen.
Phan, M. T., Fremont, V., Thouvenin, I., Sallak, M., & Cherfaoui, V.
(2015). Estimation of driver awareness of pedestrian based on hidden
markov model. In 2015 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) (pp.
970–975). Seoul, South Korea.
Phan, M. T., Frémont, V., Thouvenin, I., Sallak, M., & Cherfaoui, V.
(2014). Recognizing driver awareness of pedestrian. 17th International
IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC) (pp.
1027–1032). Qingdao, China.
Plavšić, M., Klinker, G., & Bubb, H. (2010). Situation awareness assess-
ment in critical driving situations at intersections by task and human
error analysis. Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing &
Service Industries, 20(3), 177–191. doi:10.1002/hfm.v20:3
Rabiner, L. (1989). A tutorial on hidden markov models and selected
applications in speech recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 77(2),
257–286. doi:10.1109/5.18626
Rusch, M. L., Schall, M. C. S., Gavin, P., Lee, J. D., Dawson, J. D.,
Vecera, S., & Rizzo, M. (2013). Directing driver attention with aug-
mented reality cues. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic Psychology
and Behaviour, 16, 127–137. doi:10.1016/j.trf.2012.08.007
Schall, M. C., Jr, Rusch, M. L., & Lee, J. D. (2013). Augmented reality
cues and elderly driver hazard perception. Human Factors: The
Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 55(3),
643–658. doi:10.1177/0018720812462029
Ueno, H., Kaneda, M., & Tsukino, M. (1994). Development of drowsiness
detection system. In Vehicle Navigation and Information Systems
Conference, 1994. Proceedings (pp. 15–20). doi:10.1007/bf02244746
Wesley, A., Shastri, D., & Pavlidis, I. (2010). A novel method to monitor
driver’s distractions. In CHI’10 extended abstracts on human factors in
computing systems (pp. 4273–4278). ACM.
WHO. (2013). Global status report on road safety supporting a decade of
action. Switzerland: Author.
Yeh, M., & Wickens, C. D. (2001). Display signaling in augmented
reality: Effects of cue reliability and image realism on attention alloca-
tion and trust calibration. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human
Factors
and
Ergonomics
Society,
43(3),
355–365.
doi:10.1518/
001872001775898269
About the Authors
Vincent Frémont, (Automatic Control, Ecole Centrale de Nantes,
France, 2003) is a Full Professor of Ecole Centrale de Nantes (France)
and member of the LS2N Lab. (UMR CNRS 6004). His research interests
belong to perception systems for autonomous mobile robotics with an
emphasis on computer vision, machine learning and multi-sensor fusion.
Minh-Tien Phan, (Information and Computer Science, University de
Technologie de Compiègne, France, 2016) is a Research Engineer at
University de Technologie de Compiègne. His research interests belong
to Augmented driving for intelligent vehicles and Human Factors study.
Indira Thouvenin, (Biophysics, University Pierre and Marie Curie, Paris,
France, 1989) is Professor at the CNRS Heudiasyc UMR 7253 Lab. at
University de Technologie de Compiègne, France. Her research interests
belong
to
Immersion
and
interaction
in
virtual
environments,
Augmented driving for intelligent vehicles and Assttention/inattention
estimation.
14
V. FRÉMONT ET AL.
