--- Page 1 ---
www.advmat.de
2110463  (1 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
Review
Automotive Holographic Head-Up Displays
Jana Skirnewskaja* and Timothy D. Wilkinson
J. Skirnewskaja, T. D. Wilkinson
Electrical Engineering Division
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
9 JJ Thomson Avenue, Cambridge CB3 0FA, UK
E-mail: js2459@cam.ac.uk
The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202110463.
DOI: 10.1002/adma.202110463
the crashes.[2,3] Drivers are exposed to an 
increasing amount of visual and audio 
information through the use of in-car 
and brought-in devices such as navigation 
aids and smartphones while operating a 
vehicle. Young drivers are constantly con-
nected with their social circles, and many 
drivers still use smartphones while driving 
despite expert warnings.[4] Many countries 
around the world have passed legislations 
to ban mobile phone use while operating a 
vehicle. However, these legislations are inef-
fective as eight out of ten drivers break these 
legislations between the age of 16 and 20 
years.[5] In this driver age group, 80% of the 
fatal accidents occurred due to mobile phone 
use while operating a vehicle on public 
roads.[6] The integration of augmented 
and virtual realities into the transportation 
sector is seen as the future of connected 
vehicles.[7,8] The advent of augmented reality 
(AR) technology may be appropriated in 
two-way video calling in vehicles.[9]
HUDs were first utilized in fighter 
aircrafts after World War II. The original 
HUDs emerged as an advancement to 
the reflector sight that were capable of projecting a reticle at 
the infinite.[10] Characteristics of aircraft HUDs were extracted 
from the reflector sight reticle predecessor. A semitrans-
parent window allows the transmitted light from a real world 
to be combined with a projected image that appears as a ghost 
image. Subsequently, the reticle is projected at the infinite as it 
remains fixed at distant targets regardless of the position of the 
viewer.[11] Further developments included variable focal distance 
of the projected reticle and a gyroscope.[12] However, the incor-
poration of a screen in place of the reticle opened the possibili-
ties to show dynamically a broader range of information.
HUDs have been proposed as a safer alternative to reduce 
the sight shift from the road.[13] The automotive HUD market 
is expected to grow from $3.7 billion in 2020 to $13.0 billion 
in 2025, which represents a compound annual growth rate 
of 28.5%.[14] Automotive manufacturers such as Jaguar Land 
Rover, BMW, Audi, Mercedes-Benz, and Hyundai have signifi-
cantly invested in HUDs over the last decade. Current HUD 
technologies consist of built-in optical devices provided by the 
car manufacturers (Chevrolet, BMW, Jaguar Land Rover, Toyota, 
Mercedes-Benz, and Hyundai) or external HUD suppliers 
(Garmin and Pioneer) that display vehicle navigation informa-
tion.[15] The first HUD in cars was introduced by General Motors 
within the Cutlass Supreme in 1988.[16] This HUD consisted of 
a monochromatic segment display reflected on the windshield. 
Since then color, matrices, and retractable reflectors have been 
Driver’s access to information about navigation and vehicle data through 
in-car displays and personal devices distract the driver from safe vehicle 
management. The discrepancy between road safety and infotainment must 
be addressed to develop safely operated modern vehicles. Head-up displays 
(HUDs) aim to introduce a seamless uptake of visual information for the 
driver while securely operating a vehicle. HUDs projected on the windshield 
provide the driver with visual navigation and vehicle data within the comfort 
of the driver’s personal eye box through a customizable extended display 
space. Windshield HUDs do not require the driver to shift the gaze away from 
the road to attain road information. This article presents a review of techno-
logical advances and future perspectives in holographic HUDs by analyzing 
the optoelectronics devices and the user experience of the driver. The review 
elucidates holographic displays and full augmented reality in 3D with depth 
perception when projecting the visual information on the road within the 
driver’s gaze. Design factors, functionality, and the integration of personal-
ized machine learning technologies into holographic HUDs are discussed. 
Application examples of the display technologies regarding road safety and 
security are presented. An outlook is provided to reflect on display trends and 
autonomous driving.
1. Introduction to Head-Up Displays (HUDs)
This section introduces the history of HUDs and discusses 
2D and 3D HUDs. Commercial HUDs of industrial manufac-
turers are discussed in terms of efficiency, usability, safety, and 
security.
1.1. HUDs for Car Safety
1.35 million fatal car accidents occurred on roads worldwide in 
2017.[1] Human error was a major contributing factor in 94% of 
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in 
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463

--- Page 2 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (2 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
introduced to HUDs.[17,18] In contrast to the aircraft technology, 
most commercial automotive HUDs show ghost images focused 
at a short distance from the windshield. The mismatch between 
the focal distance of the displayed image and the real objects has 
significant implications.[19,20] The eye lens requires a change in 
accommodation between the displayed image and the road even 
if the displayed image is in the line of sight.[21] The displayed vir-
tual objects or informative signs cannot be fixated in place of the 
real objects.[22] These technical challenges limit applications in 
an extended reality experience. The most important challenges 
in the implementation of HUDs to reach a real applicability in 
AR are i) the multifocal display, large viewing area without com-
promising the field of view (FOV), ii) the optimal positioning 
on the windscreen, and iii) minimal invasiveness in the driving 
behavior by accurately pointing out hazards on the road.
The manufacturing cost of a HUD based on microelectrome-
chanical systems (e.g., micromirrors) is constantly decreasing 
($100–150).[23] The built-in HUDs can provide a wide range of 
information including vehicle data and night vision with the 
option to turn the HUD off and automatically on to alert the 
driver.[23] Current studies are focused on language processing 
and gesture control to provide driver specific information using 
sensors and cameras.[24] As compared to head-down displays 
that require an information uptake in 1.8 s, HUDs can attain 
information uptake in 1.0 s, which can decrease mental fatigue 
and prevent gaze shift from the road.[26] Automotive manufac-
turers have developed built-in HUDs with different operating 
mechanisms. Peugeot proposed a portable projector system 
located on the dashboard of the vehicle.[27] The panel of trans-
lucent polycarbonate adjusts the brightness of the projected 
images with built-in sensors. This built-in HUD is like external 
HUDs, but it has the advantage of being fully connected with 
the operation system of the vehicle and can maintain a safe dis-
tance between vehicles by taking and processing sensor infor-
mation in real time on the road. BMW proposed a full wind-
shield HUD with mirrors capable of projecting high-contrast, 
easy-to-read images into the driver’s line of sight on the wind-
shield in full color.[28] Jaguar Land Rover developed a HUD 
with local dynamic depth-variable viewing angle and enlarged 
driver eye box by considering the driver’s head movement.[29] 
This technology can project dynamic pop-ups for hazard warn-
ings within the HUD, creating an image depth of 50 cm and an 
image size of 1.4 times the natural viewing experience.
This review focuses on holographic techniques for AR appli-
cations in the automotive sector to increase road safety and 
driver’s comfort. The article discusses hardware and software, 
including LiDAR, AR, in-eye panoramic holographic projec-
tions, point cloud data generation and processing, 3D com-
puter-generated holography (CGH) custom elaboration, 3D 
holographic video displays, and the expansion of the field of 
view and the driver’s eye box.[30] The review elucidates optical 
methods, the interactions of the holographic technology with 
an interactive urban environment, the impact on the driver and 
the surroundings, and an outlook of this technology in com-
bination with the environment. It also provides an analysis of 
the placement of the content on the windshield in AR technolo-
gies according to the driver’s understandability of the provided 
information, safety, and user satisfaction. Information layout 
concepts based on machine learning technology could subdi-
vide the projection area and customize it. Certain objects could 
be prioritized and placed into an area of personal preference 
by the driver. The question of possible driver distraction with 
advanced infotainment options was addressed with support 
from statistical data. The article analyzes the system compo-
nents, subsystems such as the effects on the driver and the 
environment. The article discusses the robustness of commer-
cial products, proposed holographic devices, and the overall 
supersystem network operations. Possible driver distraction 
with advanced infotainment systems is also discussed. An out-
look is provided on AR in consumer devices and autonomous 
driving with artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities.
1.2. Windshield Projections
Figure 1a illustrates a conventional HUD system showing the 
mechanism of the perceived images directly projected into the 
driver’s eyes through the personalized eye box area. 3D floating 
projection can be achieved through different optical methods. 
The HUD technology involves an elaborated optical system, 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
Figure 1.  Perception of images and depth cues in HUD systems. a) A conventional holographic HUD showing system components. The viewer per-
ceives the original image within the viewer’s eye box limited by the field of view. b) Physical depth cues of the eyes showing motion parallax, conver-
gence, binocular disparity, and accommodation.

--- Page 3 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (3 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
the image and the perceived image in the driver’s field of view, 
and the crucial component of the driver’s personal eye box 
(Figure 1b).[31] Optical phenomena created by the human eyes 
need to be considered when designing an elaborated HUD:[32]
•	 Accommodation
•	 Motion parallax
•	 Convergence
•	 Binocular disparity
•	 Linear perspective
•	 Shading
•	 Occlusion
•	 Texture
•	 Prior acquired knowledge
Accommodation represents the adjustment of the focal length 
of the human eyes by controlling the ciliary muscle tension.[33] 
This process evaluates the rate of change of the human eye lens 
when the ciliary muscles contract to obtain a focused image of 
an observed object. Motion parallax compares relative motion of 
different elements in a 3D environment by using depth cues.[34] 
When the viewer moves, closer objects appear to move faster 
than the objects further away. Convergence measures the angular 
difference between the viewer’s eyes and the viewing directions 
when observing the same fixated point on one object; the closer 
the object, the greater the convergence.[35] The difference in 
resulting images by both eyes is presented by binocular disparity 
(stereo). The further an object, the further apart the two images 
acquired with both eyes. Linear perspective is an appearing rela-
tive distance of acquired objects.[36] Any two straight parallel lines 
appear to converge at a distant point. Shading describes variations 
in light intensity that form a 3D spatial-relationship clue, which 
recreates object orientation and surface shape in the brain.[37] The 
occlusion effect indicates that objects behind an opaque object 
appear further away than two interposing objects.[38] Texture 
refers to the surface structure of objects recreating the 3D shape 
of the object together with the object distance from the viewer.[39] 
Importantly, prior knowledge considers familiar shapes and sizes 
of common structures static, and in motion can recreate their 3D 
shapes and their distances in the viewer’s brain.[40]
Some commercial 3D displays cover all the depth cues. HUDs 
can be classical and holographic. The classical HUDs utilize a 
projector instead of a spatial light modulator (SLM) (Figure 1a). 
The advantage of holographic HUDs is the depth information 
and the possibility to project objects as augmented and mixed 
reality in 3D in the driver’s field of view.[41] Hence, holographic 
HUDs are paramount to explore the possibilities of augmented 
and mixed reality for road safety. For example, Philips offers an 
end-to-end 3D display enabling live capture of new 3D content, 
visualization, and animation of 3D objects.[42] SeeReal Technolo-
gies’ holographic 3D display products offer selective accommoda-
tion of the observer’s eye lenses and natural depth perception.[43] 
VividQ offers holographic displays for AR application with real 
depth perception and bright image quality of 500  000  cd m−2 
without exceeding 1.64 W.[44] QinetiQ’s printing by active tilting 
apparatus can subdivide the photosensitive area into tilted sub-
areas. Various illuminations account for selected pixelated light 
pattern controlling the assembly of the final image produced 
from the subareas with over 5 bln px.[45] Envisics provides 
holographic HUDs with AR experiences catering specifically 
to the automotive market for advanced driver assistance sys-
tems.[46,47] BMW and Siemens VDO Automotive system devel-
oped a HUD with a brightness of 500 000 cd m−2. The optical 
path was diverted with a reflector to a thin film transistor display, 
where the display images were generated at 65  000 px.[48] The 
HUD provided a homogeneous backlighting for the image-gen-
erating device with light emitting diode (LED) sources.[49]
Lincoln in collaboration with Continental generated a HUD 
with a brightness of 15 000 cd m−2, a dynamic dimming range of 
5000-to-1, and temperature stability. The DLP3000-Q1 technology 
does not require light source polarization. The HUD is capable 
of projecting virtual images 15–20 m ahead of the driver.[50] The 
HUD consists of a 0.3 in. digital micromirror device (DMD) and 
a DLPC120 DMD controller. The field of view on the windshield 
is 10° × 2.5° and the resolution is 70 px deg−1.[51] Mercedes-Benz 
and Nippon Seiki’s collaboration resulted in a HUD generating 
an active projection image of 45 × 15 cm2 projected at a distance 
of 10 m. A micromirror and a customized digital projector gen-
erated a virtual image. The implemented HUD is adjustable in 
terms of the projection location of the display light. This allows 
for adjusting the height of the HUD based on the observer’s 
point of view without the movement of the virtual image in ver-
tical direction.[52] Additionally, the compact HUD from Nippon 
Seiki enables generating images in the HUD with a plurality of 
display distances. This is achieved through the display that emits 
projection light to illustrate the virtual image at a predetermined 
distance. An image formation adjusting mirror receives the pro-
jection light and converts it into a plurality of first and second 
projection lights at different distances.[53] Nissan and Panasonic 
collaborated on a HUD with a see-through display. This HUD 
included a light source, an optical projection system, which was 
capable of displaying volumetric holograms.[54] Table  1 shows 
commercial 3D display technologies. Table 1 illustrates existing 
commercial HUDs that focus on improved resolution, a greater 
field of view for the driver, and increased display brightness. 
These are industrial requirements to improve the HUD tech-
nology, but the effect on the driver and overall road safety are 
not yet clear. Further human-centered studies need to be carried 
out to understand the industrial design effects on overall road 
safety and security. For example, the need to personalize content 
in HUDs for the driver is another design criterion that should be 
considered. An inclusive strategy for the driver should be devel-
oped to quantify the progress and improvement of each techno-
logical design requirement of current HUDs. Displays, which 
require additional features such as stereoglasses to bridge the 
accommodation and convergence effects, can cause fatigue to 
the spectator as the images are projected in 2D instead of their 
physical distance in 3D space.[55,56]
Design proposals incorporate a balance between the risks and 
the advantages of windshield HUDs such as considering driver’s 
abilities and the priority of tasks in every single context of the 
transportation.[58] A need for a human-centered approach in the 
design of windshield HUDs is paramount for safety and secu-
rity on roads.[59] The driver’s cognitive and sensory abilities need 
to be balanced with the driver’s needs for windshield HUDs. A 
windshield HUD provides the driver with 3D information that 
merges with the road scene.[60] The focus point of the driver 
wanders within the field of view when primarily targeted forward 
sceneries are processed. The sensory capability of the driver 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463

--- Page 4 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (4 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
allows for small pieces of the 3D information to be processed at 
once when presented visually to the driver.[61] Appropriate design 
of individual information customized for every situation, such as 
the position and size supported with colors, can guarantee rapid 
danger recognition and improved road safety.
The projected information on the windshield should follow 
strict guidelines in design to follow a user-centered approach 
for reducing hazards.[62] The principles of information presenta-
tion must enhance the driver’s intuition and must enforce safety 
while driving. The projections should be displayed in specific 
areas on the windshield and must not require long attention and 
perception times to understand the meaning of the presented 
data.[63] Information density should be increased and critical 
safety awareness signs must be strategically placed on the wind-
shield to i) reduce traffic blind moments, ii) minimize distrac-
tion, iii) cluster relevant and similar information, iv) enhance sit-
uation awareness, and v) highlight relevant input information for 
the driver (Figure 2a–c). An option is the layout of locating items 
by relevance such as contextual relation and spatial proximity to 
reduce the driver’s effort in processing visual information.
An efficiency analysis of the industrial HUD system archi-
tecture with failure-mode analysis framework was performed 
to strategize the advantages and disadvantages of current com-
mercial HUDs. Each system component was justified, including 
components such as the laser source and the SLM. The 3D holog-
raphy applications across commercial products were analyzed 
through a critical assessment in terms of security, safety, color, 
uniformity, and luminance. Additionally, 2D windshield and 
2D/3D in-eye projection-based holographic setups were bench-
marked with commercial display technologies in terms of com-
ponent arrangement in the optical system and efficiency. The 
assessment parameters presented for industrial HUD manufac-
turers apply to 2D windshield projections (Table  1). The lumi-
nance and uniformity of the projections decrease in quality in 3D 
augmented reality projection mode. Hence, the need for display 
performance metrics for 2D and 3D HUDs should be established. 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
Figure 2.  The current state of HUD applications in the automotive industry. a) HUD image projected on the windshield of the car in 2D showing a 
right turn and the vehicle speed. b) HUD showing road directions in the urban environment. c) A personalized HUD with complete windshield space 
used for information display. The highlighted area in red shows the space, where most driver attention is situated, to display crucial information. The 
area highlighted in orange shows secondary driver attention space for a calculated layout of the HUD to enhance road security.
Table 1.  Commercial automotive HUDs with their optical properties and resolution parameters.
Car manufacturer
Display manufacturer
Wavelength [nm]
Panel resolution
FOV (°)
Display brightness [cd m−2]
References
Jaguar Land Rover
Envisics
532/633
4096 × 2400 px
15 × 5
12 500
[47,57]
BMW
Siemens VDO 
Automotive
275, 530, 880
65 000 px
10 × 4
500 000
[48,49]
Lincoln
Continental
450, 520
70 px deg−1
10 × 2.5
15 000
[50,51]
Mercedes-Benz, 
Porsche
Nippon Seiki
275, 530, 880
4K UHD
10 × 4
15 000
[52,53]
Nissan
Panasonic
637
4K UHD
10 × 4
N/A
[54]

--- Page 5 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (5 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
A method of defining requirements and boundaries was devel-
oped for the qualified viewing space which was based on the dis-
play quality performance parameters.[64] Such boundaries could 
include but are not limited to a set of physical location points for 
the driver’s eyes, where the HUD luminance degrades to 50% 
from the peak intensity. Another boundary could be the projec-
tion distance for 3D holographic AR projections. 2D windshield 
HUD efficiency studies have been carried out to describe another 
crucial parameter: the cognitive capture effect.[65] This parameter 
evaluates the inefficient attention switching from the HUD pro-
jections to the driving task. In a simulation study of 48 users, 2D 
windshield HUDs showed fast response time in unanticipated 
road events such as speed limit detection. Additionally, 2D HUDs 
promote driving behavior such as smaller variances in lateral 
acceleration.[66] One study verified the driving behavior with less 
mean deviation from lane in an International Standard Organi-
zation (ISO) 26022 lane changing task.[67] Another metric for 
2D windshield HUDs could be the relative ghost luminance 
(RGL).[68] A P-pol combiner film was developed to increase the 
projection image quality by reducing the RGL to 20% com-
pared to wedge-system windshield projection with RGL of 
40–60%.[69] Regarding the 3D AR HUD metrics, an optical see-
through HUD (AR DriveSim) was developed to examine physi-
ological and cognitive effects of HUDs with context and focal 
distance switching.[70] Another criterion for introducing met-
rics for HUDs is inclusivity, where the superposition of text in 
projections was found to have a negative effect among elderly 
users.[71] Finally, ergonomic studies suggested that the place-
ment and the amount of HUD projection content is crucial.[58] 
Fewer than 6 symbols should be displayed at one time and the 
main content should be placed in the center of the windshield. 
Gap analysis frameworks can allow for defining metrics for the 
component arrangement and replay field efficiency to meet 
the industry requirements for holographic HUDs.
2. Holographic HUDs
This section focuses on holographic HUDs for safety applica-
tions on public road. HUD setups including the manufacturers 
of optical components are evaluated. Holographic projection 
methods and associated computing algorithms are described 
to achieve 3D projections. Holographic HUDs can serve as a 
defensive technology to promote driver attention, reducing the 
eye strain of the driver, and provide shorter obstacle visualiza-
tion times.[72] It is highly desirable to develop holographic HUD 
technologies for diverse user groups including elderly and disa-
bled populations.[73] By means of human–machine interaction 
studies, optimized data architecture and differentiation can 
be analyzed and implemented in HUD to project the sensed 
objects on the road. A key development area in holographic 
projections is the obtained image (replay field).[74] An uneven 
replay field results from the overlap of neighboring pixel fields, 
creating an envelope that should be compensated. Computa-
tional approaches to reduce the uneven replay field and speckle 
can benefit the holographic displays.[75] Moreover, goal-oriented 
approach can be used to obtain single objects in the replay field; 
and hence, in the “eye box.” This eye box measures 6 × 6 cm2 
with an overall brightness of 16 000 cd m−2.[76] It is a precaution 
toward the ever-growing tendency of superimposing visual 
information over the real-world scene on the windscreen. The 
principle of this work is based on minimal interference with 
driver assistance systems in the driving behavior. This could be 
monitored via a smartphone application or on the holographic 
projector itself to reduce driver tasks while using sensors. A 
collimated optical system needs a predefined exit pupil. As 
conventional HUDs are fixed, retaining a small exit pupil is 
challenging.[62] With the introduction of the panoramic display, 
which can be projected directly in the eye box (90 × 90 mm2) 
of the driver’s personal preference, the requirement of the exit 
pupil of a diameter of 150 mm can be achieved.[11]
Holographic projections can be integrated in automotive 
HUDs, which require a high image contrast for AR to enable a 
tunable projection distance for both the near and the far fields. 
Industrial HUD technologies are limited in projecting floating 
images on multiple layers, hindering applications in 3D AR.[77] 
CGH allows for displaying floating 3D objects for HUDs and 
head-mounted screens. Ultrahigh-definition (UHD) (4K) SLMs 
can enable increasing the field of view and display size in 
CGH.[78] Holography is a unique technology to develop virtual 
and augmented realities.[79] CGHs allow for projecting digital 
inference patterns through a SLM without the requirement 
of a real object.[80] Holographic HUDs can project 3D objects 
directly into the retina to achieve an AR experience.
2.1. Lasers and LED Sources
Light sources and their coherence properties in holographic 
displays have a direct impact on image sharpness and speckle 
noise.[81] Both temporal and spatial coherence can be affected 
by the intrinsic spectrum bandwidth, the size, and the optical 
path of the light source. Spectral bandwidth and source size 
are key parameters for choosing a light source. The spectral 
bandwidth should be narrow band (<1 nm) to reduce the blur-
riness of the replay field image. The blurriness increases with 
increased spectral bandwidth of the laser.[82] Table 2 shows the 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
Table 2.  Product target specification of lasers in holographic HUDs.
Criteria
Requirement
Result
Spatial coherence
Device size
Contrast, speckle
Linear polarization
>100:1 extinction ratio
Contrast, efficiency
Focused beam
Fill factor > 93%
Resolution
Wavelength
Blue: 440–480 nm, green: 
515–550 nm, red: 620–642 nm
Luminance
Optical output power
250–500 mW
Brightness
Ellipticity
Matched to height-to-diameter 
aspect ratio of the SLM
Efficiency > 25%
Lifetime
Automatic HUD > 10 000 h
Reduced number  
of lasers > 200 mW
Thermal management
Passive or active cooling to 
stabilize at 60 °C
Stability of the output 
power
Cost
$2–30
Cost competitive with  
high-power LEDs
Device size
2 L
Reduced HUD size

--- Page 6 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (6 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
key requirements for lasers in automotive HUDs. The diode-
pumped solid-state (DPSS) frequency-doubled Nd:YVO4 laser 
(532  nm, 340  mW) showed cost-effectiveness and elimination 
of electromagnetic noise, which resulted in less speckle and 
noise in the replay field images (Table 3).[83] The He–Ne laser 
(λ = 633 nm, 5 mW) with a collimated beam and long coherence 
length can also be utilized.[84,85] In terms of temporal coherence, 
laser diodes and DPSS lasers achieved increased sharpness in 
the replay fields compared to LEDs and microLEDs (mLEDs).[86]
The spatial coherence value and the image sharpness values 
are directly proportional.[81] Hence, light sources with a low 
temporal coherence and high spatial coherence are suitable 
for application in holographic displays to generate sharp replay 
field results with minimal speckle noise. Such light sources 
could be superluminescent light emitting diodes, mLEDs, and 
LEDs with a broad spectrum and spatial filters (Table 4).[81] LED 
backlight units have been incorporated into an optical setup, 
which allowed for emitting light in a narrow cone shape to 
collect the light around the driver’s eye box area.[81] The imple-
mentation of 50 LEDs (23 W) resulted in a brightness of 13 398 
nit in the driver’s eye box with a total homogeneity of 97% 
white and 83% black measured over 25 points.[91] This process 
is desirable for specific optical setup configurations, such as 
when using Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) panels with lenticular 
lenses, which require a fixed angle of luminescence from the 
light source. The optical setup design was simulated in Optic-
Studio (Zemax) to achieve an angular spot size of <1 arcmin to 
match the human eye resolution to >60 px deg−1. This optical 
setup configuration resulted in high brightness and the sup-
pression of stray light in the replay field.
2.2. SLMs
The phase modulation criterion instead of an intensity modu-
lation is crucial for choosing a SLM. This is based on higher 
diffraction efficiencies of the phase-modulated devices than the 
amplitude-modulated.[72] The efficiency of the replay field pro-
jection increases when the SLM modulates the phase instead 
of the intensity.[98] The SLM offers i) at least a 2π modulation, 
ii) a fast response time, iii) high resolution, iv) large fill fac-
tors, and v) multilevel phase modulation for the maximum 
efficiency.[72] The SLM should have adequate resolution of at 
least 512 × 512 px to reproduce an accurate replay field. The 
higher the frame rate of the SLM, the less the neighboring 
pixels on the same hologram generated. Studies focused on 
antiparallelly aligned electrically controlled birefringence mode 
liquid crystal on silicon (LCoS) SLMs.[99] A LCoS SLM con-
sists of two substrates: i) Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) glass as the 
electrode and ii) Complementary metal-oxide semiconductor 
(CMOS) backplane with a resolution of 1280 × 770 px. There 
are pretilted angles of ≈5° which are created by a coating on 
both substrates of the alignment layers. The two substrates are 
aligned in antiparallel directions resulting in a liquid crystal 
(LC) cell with 1.7 µm space in-between. The liquid crystal mate-
rial (JTS-1) should fill the complete cell to a birefringence level 
of 0.212 and dielectric anisotropy of 6.7.[72] A LCoS binary SLM 
was developed for industrial displays.[100] This device, however, 
only showed a π modulation. A 4K SLM (Jasper Display) has 
a phase of 2π, which could facilitate optical field manipula-
tion such as the creation of complex beam structures with a 
total conversion efficiency of 49%.[78] The LCoS technology 
offers reflective coating and 4K display with a panel resolution 
of 3840 × 2160 px. The SLM was operated at 633  nm with a 
He–Ne laser (5 mW). Linear polarizers allowed for controlling 
the axial polarization of the laser source. The polarizers were 
crucial to find the so-called liquid crystal switching angles. Gen-
erally, light polarized at 90° would be parallel to the axis of the 
liquid crystal and the SLM. A minimized zero-order and the 
clearest image appears when all polarizers were placed at 45° 
to align with the liquid crystal switching angle of the SLM.[78] 
Metasurfaces covered by ultrathin plasmonic structures can 
be utilized to control the phase of light.[101] There are different 
types of metasurfaces: i) coupled thermal antenna arrays for the 
manipulation of spontaneous or stimulated emission[102] and ii) 
ultrathin devices consisting of a monolayer of subwavelength 
(UV–vis to Near-Infrared (NIR)) plasmonic resonators for con-
trolling the wavefront of electromagnetic waves.[103] However, 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
Table 3.  Laser specifications in holography.
Type
Wavelength [nm]
Power [mW]
Coherence length [mm]
Manufacturer
References
Diode lasers
445
21–200
2.1 ± 0.02
Thorlabs
[87]
Diode arrays
808
150–300
1.4 ± 0.02
Coherent Inc.
[88]
DPSS
1064
100–750
>50 000
Jenoptik AG
[89]
DPSS
532
5
>50 000
IPG Photonics
[90]
Table 4.  LED specifications in holography. * FWHM: The full width at half maximum.
Type
Wavelength [nm]
Power [mW]
Bandwidth (FWHM) [nm]
Manufacturer
References
Surface-mounted diode (SMD)
450
100–250
13
Thorlabs
[92]
Through-hole LEDs
365–1650
80–1000
81
Luckylight
[93]
Bicolor LEDs
470–565
60–170
55
Neumüller
[94]
Red, green, blue (RGB) LEDs
474, 536, 630
62.5, 51, 51
16, 22, 31
Lumex
[95]
UV LEDs
365–405
60–120
17
Marubeni
[96]
High-power LEDs
940
1300
47
Lumileds
[97]

--- Page 7 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (7 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
the geometric metasurfaces with arrays of plasmonic nanorods 
with spatially varying orientations showed properties of phase 
control based on the geometry of their phase profile. CGHs 
were created based on geometric metasurfaces that reached dif-
fraction efficiencies of 80% at a wavelength of 825 nm and a 
broad bandwidth between 630 and 1050 nm.[101] Other investi-
gators demonstrated multilayer subwavelength metal elements 
capable of forming a CG phase-only hologram in the IR region 
(10.6 µm).[104] Introducing metamaterials can lead to greater con-
trol over the propagation of light, which might result in more 
compact, efficient, and versatile optical components. The meta-
materials implemented consisted of gold disks (75 nm), rectan-
gular patches, and I-beams of various dimensions centered in a 
cuboid SiO2 substrate (1 µm × 1 µm × 500 nm). Although gold is 
a suitable metal at the wavelength of operation (560–590 nm), 
SiO2 substrate with aspect ratio (AR) (0.25) showed significantly 
more absorption than gold substrate (AR = 0.2). The replay field 
had an image of 150 × 150 px each consisting of 5 × 5 metama-
terial elements. The metamaterial structures could be modified 
to manage polarization; hence, controlled anisotropy or even 
chirality may be incorporated to the material resulting in more 
degrees of control with minimal manufacturing complexity.[104]
2.3. CGH Image Generation
The ability to focus at different depths within the replay field 
results and layer various objects at different distances was cre-
ated by a virtual Fresnel lens based on the Fresnel diffraction 
theory.[111] The holograms are computationally created, and 
are layered at different distances within the observer’s replay 
field from near-eye and extending to the far field.[112] Positive 
lenses could be utilized as Fourier transformers for phase 
transformation.[113] A layered hologram based on the angular 
tilting concept and a graphic rendering approach generated 
a 3D hologram. In this process, a 3D object was sliced into 
cross-sectional layers, which were placed perpendicular to a 
chosen viewing direction. Additionally, depth cues, occlusion, 
and shading were incorporated due to the graphics rendering 
approach. Parallel computing algorithms enabled a compu-
tation time of 176  ms by using a graphics processing unit 
card.[114] In Figure  3a, the concave lens is at distance d away 
from the input, which is a complex transmission function 
U(x,y). The lens is illuminated by a collimated monochromatic 
laser light (λ = 633 nm) and amplitude 1.[115] Figure 3b,c illus-
trates different lens arrangements in the holography setup. 
No lens is present in Figure  3b, and the light path is undif-
fracted. In Figure  3c, the light path is shown with a convex 
lens. Figure 3d,e shows a comparison between a conventional 
optical holographic display system and a Fourier transform 
optical system with a virtual lens.[116]
The Huygens–Fresnel diffraction method can be applied on 
the basis of Maxwell’s and the Rayleigh–Sommerfeld equations 
on the propagation of the electromagnetic field.[117] The propa-
gation of an electromagnetic field M from a random point 0r to 
an arbitrary point r can be described as the surface integral[118]






d
0
0
0
M r
U r
e
r
r
s
jk r
r
∫∫
( )
( ) ∝
−
−

(1)
where k  = 2π/λ is the wavevector. There is a theory, described 
as the Huygen’s wavelet theory, which elaborates on each point 
of light becoming a secondary emitter of spherical wavelets.[119] 
This theory leads the preservation of straight wavefronts, which 
cannot be sustained unless the waves pass through an aperture. 
All edges of the aperture will cause a lack of emitters leading to 
an overall distortion of the wavefront diffraction.[120] Two approx-
imations result from the nontrivial integral of Equation (1): 
the Fraunhofer approximation for the far field, and the Fresnel 
approximation for a near or intermediate field.[121] The first 
approximation, the Fraunhofer field, occurs with[121]
0
2
2
2
(
)
(
)
−
=
−′
+
−′
+
r
r
x
x
y
y
z



(2)
which is evaluated to a point approaching infinity. With a 
standard Taylor expansion, it can be demonstrated for a large 
distance z[122]
,
,
d
d
M x y
U x y e
x
y
j k
z xx
yy
∫∫
(
)
(
)
∝
′
′
′
′
(
)
′ +
′

(3)
Equation  (3) represents the Fourier transform of the field 
function at the diffraction plane, where k/z describes the rela-
tive size of the resulting hologram. Any utilized SLM can only 
define a retardation phase of the propagated field. This implies 
that a given phase at the diffractive plane should be capable 
of creating an intensity profile at the far field. However, there 
is no analytical solution to obtain the phase at the hologram 
plane creating an intensity profile in the Fourier domain.[123] 
The analytical solutions optimizing the process are known as 
phase retrieval algorithms such as the Gerchberg–Saxton (GS) 
method.[80] To obtain a solution in the intermediate field, the 
Fresnel approximation is required.[124] This presents a neces-
sity for a further term in the Taylor expansion. An additional 
approximation shows a multiplicative quadratic term[122]
,
,
d
d
2
2
2
M x y
M x y e
e
x
y
j jk
z x
y
j k
z xx
yy
∫∫
(
)
(
)
∝
′
′






′
′
(
)
(
)
+
′ +
′

(4)
The Fresnel diffraction is a convolution process which can be 
expressed as
,
,
(
)
(
)
′
=
×
M u v
M u v
h 
(5)
where M(u, v) is the initial field and h is the impulse response 
of the optical system, which is given by the quadratic term
2
2
2
=
(
)
+
h
e
j jk
z x
y

(6)
where h is referred as the Fresnel diffraction lens. To find the 
focal point with the used diffraction pattern, the variable z can 
be set as the focal distance.[121] Fresnel holography utilizes the 
encoding of an object. The encoding process is generated with 
Fresnel diffraction and interferences with a reference wave. 
Equation (5) performs a transformation of the convolution pro-
cess into a Fourier transform, which allows numerical fast Fou-
rier transform (FFT) algorithm implementation.[125]
2.4. Holographic Image Generation Algorithms
Fresnel virtual lens or a Gabor superlens algorithmic methods 
can be utilized to superpose 3D holographic replay fields by a 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463

--- Page 8 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (8 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
summation process of their direct viewed replay field focused 
at infinity.[126] These methods utilize an advanced GS algorithm 
for phase retrieval to optimize the replay field results. The 
replay fields were focused at infinity to superimpose the sum-
mated results in the method in order to create floating replay 
field reconstructions.[127] To achieve this result, the focal length 
of the CGH was set to infinity and the projection (viewing) 
angle was kept constant. The field of view was limited based 
on the superposition method because this effect could have 
been only reached with a specific viewing angle (4.85° and 
14.58° depending on the focal length of the lens). To reduce 
the zero order in the replay field results, the rotations of the 
two polarizers in the setup were modulated. A layering tech-
nique achieved 10–20 µm layers for 1024 × 1024 px resolution 
by introducing a sparse template holographic fringe pattern for 
3D objects.[128] In another study, UHD 3840 × 2160 px resolu-
tion was attained based on a layering approach in real time with 
24 frames s−1.[116] This technology has the potential to be uti-
lized in AR applications.[112] This algorithm-only approach was 
utilized to display replay field results with multiple depths by 
using a stochastic gradient decent (SGD) algorithm with com-
plex loss function.[129] Previous algorithms calculated the loss 
function generally by comparing the obtained amplitude of the 
reconstructed image with the target images at different depth 
planes.[130] Hence, the optimization time is a crucial challenge. 
The SGD uses the complex loss function for optimization. 
This reduces the optimization time by comparing the complex 
loss instead of the amplitude-based multidepth loss. Hence, 
the optimization time of the algorithm is close to the single-
depth optimization time.[129] Fourier and Fresnel methods have 
been used to generate CGHs.[131] The Fresnel method generates 
arbitrary large images with object depths.[132,133] The Fourier 
method utilizes the kinoform technique to project the replay 
field (projection area) at the focal plane of a lens.[134] A CGH 
can be formed through the phase retrieval,[135,136] the wavefront 
recording plane,[137] the multiview,[132] and the polygon-based[138] 
algorithms such as triangular of hexagonal. With the polygon-
based method, full-parallax CGHs with four billion pixels can 
be obtained.[139] Phase-only CGHs provide high diffraction effi-
ciency for the reconstructed replay field. Holograms are capable 
of producing 3D colored images with a modified GS algo-
rithm.[140] By utilizing a Fresnel incoherent correlation holog-
raphy, experimental and digital colored holographic images 
were obtained.[141] This cost-effective holography system could 
be applied in automotive HUDs.
Multilevel phase modulators based on LCoS with reflective 
coating, 4K UHD, and a panel resolution of 3840 × 2160 px 
have a greater efficiency due to the absence of conjugate orders 
and residual zero orders.[142] The robustness of holographic 
projectors lies in the setup as only one lens is used without a 
polarizer.[143] Another advantage is the control over the output 
image due to the continuation of the holographic projection, 
which is an important criterion in selecting the optical setup 
used for applications in cars. A study proposed layered holo-
graphic projection methods to display UHD 3D images in 
direct-view floating mode.[144] A laser and a LED at 532 nm were 
used. Computational algorithms were created based on phase 
retrieval algorithms and a virtual Fresnel lens to project several 
holograms onto the LCoS display panel of a 4K SLM. Additional 
codes such as the Wirtinger derivatives and hardware in the 
loop were developed for generating multilayer 3D near-eye pro-
jections by adding multiple retrieved holograms with an inde-
pendent Fresnel zone plate into a single hologram.[145]
Using Wirtinger derivatives allows for posing the phase 
retrieval problem as a quadratic problem, which can be mini-
mized with first-order optimization methods.[146] This method 
facilitates rendering 3D scenes. The HOLOEYE LETO-I LCoS 
with reflective coating phase-only spatial light modulator with 
a resolution of 1920 × 1080 px was utilized for the optimization 
method. The pixel pitch of the SLM was 6.4 µm, resulting in the 
active area of 12.28 × 6.91 mm2. A single optical fiber was cou-
pled to laser diodes (446, 517, and 636 nm), in combination with 
collimating optics, to illuminate the SLM in the optical setup. 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
Figure 3.  Image reconstruction in direct-view holography. a) A negative 
lens with an input of complex amplitude transmission. b) The light path 
with the human eye as a positive lens with an input of complex amplitude 
transmission. c) A positive lens in addition to the human eye lens with an 
input of complex amplitude transmission. d) A conventional holography 
system. e) A Fourier transform holography system.

--- Page 9 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (9 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
The laser power was controlled by a laser diode controller, and 
the output was linearly polarized. The SLM had a refresh rate of 
60 Hz, which was illuminated by the laser source in a color field 
sequential manner. This method reached reconstruction quality 
of 40 dB. Others developed accelerated algorithms by combining 
coherent ray tracing algorithms with look-up tables (LUTs),[147] 
combining data compression with LUTs,[148] and by intro-
ducing customized computer clusters such as the HORN-6.[149]  
The developed method outperformed double phase encoding 
holograms by more than 10  dB across all datasets.[150] Others 
managed to obtain reconstructions with a He–Ne laser 
(633  nm, 5  mW) and a 4K SLM with reflective phase modu-
lation. 3D holograms were directly observed floating as ghost 
images at a different focal distances and sizes.[151] Concave and 
convex lenses were varied at the output of the LCoS display 
panel in the direct-view mode to increase the field of view of the 
hologram up to the size of the beam splitter.
Every image can be represented as an intensity map of pixels. 
The most crucial parameter which can be varied currently 
is the phase. The phase controls the replay field projection by 
regulating the pixel-to-pixel interactions.[152] The phase can addi-
tionally control the gratings’ interaction in the CGH.[153] This 
parameter is paramount in the FFT method when creating the 
CGH because it can be varied to optimize the replay field pro-
jections either manually or computationally. When the CGH is 
created with the FFT, one limiting factor is the bandwidth of 
this system containing the amount of gratings.[154] Therefore, 
the phase between 0 and 2π is applied to set the amount of 
grating within the limits of the bandwidth of the supersystem. 
A method was developed to optimize the CGH, which was based 
on the FFT and the GS methods.[121] This method was based 
on the phase retrieval method to optimize the replay field pro-
jection. The GS method was based on a chosen phase map, 
which was applied to the square root of the intensity map of 
pixels from the original image with an iterative approach.[155,156] 
The FFT was based on a discrete amount of pixels (points) to 
prevent a continuing source of pixels into the FT integral for-
mula.[157] Each pixel had one grating in the original image f(u, v). 
The inverse digital Fourier transform (DFT) of the original image 
provided the total amount and the arrangement of the discrete 
gratings, which could be defined as the sampling of an image. 
To improve the replay field projection, the grating could be mod-
ified with a GS code.[84,158] The DFT and the FFT were different 
equations leading to the same result; hence, the FFT equation 
was used for the FT in the GS algorithm. In the DFT, the output 
determined N points, each consisting of N number of input 
points, which needed to be multiplied by a complex number. In 
mathematical terms, the problem can be displayed based on the 
complexity of the order O(N2). In the general case, M × N input 
and output points were used. There is a constant factor (N2) tar-
geted to increase the algorithm’s speed and performance.[113,159] 
The use of FFT accelerates the traditional computational pro-
cess.[119] To reduce the size of the optical setup, algorithms could 
be implemented as functions for: i) image conversion into a 
hologram instead of a holographic plate, and ii) integration of 
a virtual Fresnel lenses to remove at least one lens in the optical 
setup. Furthermore, algorithms could be used to test optimiza-
tion and focusing functions: i) GS function, ii) Fresnel function, 
and iii) scripts for generating multilayer holograms.[116,160]
2.4.1. Functions
The functions evaluate the mathematical expressions. These 
mathematical expressions are validated within the function’s 
algorithms.
Conversion of 3D Objects into Holograms: Functions have 
been developed to implement the GS algorithm, which itera-
tively finds an optimum value for a multiphase hologram.[80] 
A Fourier transform was taken to approach the target image. 
The input variables in this function were the initial phase of the 
hologram, the target image intensity, and the total number of 
iterations. To start the function, an initialization of the mode is 
achieved by a for loop.[135] In the for loop script, a hologram is 
defined with an initial allocated phase. When the FT is applied 
to the hologram, a new phase of the final replay field result is 
retrieved. This indicates that the phase of the replay field image 
is extracted and combined with the target image.[156,161]
Algorithmic Virtual Fresnel Lens and Gabor Superlens: A virtual 
lens creates a virtual propagator system that enables an experi-
mental and theoretical study of beam propagation and light dif-
fraction without physically moving any optical component.[162] 
Virtual lenses simplify the optical setup by decreasing the 
required number of lenses. An angular spectrum method that 
used Fresnel and Gabor superlens zoneplates was implemented 
on a phase-only SLM (PLUTO, HOLOEYE Photonics). The 
SLM had a reflective LCoS microdisplay (1920 × 1080 px). The 
pixel pitch of the SLM was 8 µm, with 256 grayscale levels.[163] 
The design of the algorithm included holograms capable of 
producing 3D images at different distances, where the effective 
plane of observation could be changed. This process was carried 
out by changing the encoded propagation instead of physically 
moving components in the optical setup. The input variables in 
the algorithm are the size of the grid in x- and y-axes, the phys-
ical period of the pixel pitch, the focal point of the target, and 
the wavelength of the optical beam.[125] A mesh of coordinates 
in the axes is generated and evaluated, thereafter, the Fresnel 
and Gabor functions are retrieved.[164] Additionally, an accelera-
tion of the virtual Fresnel and Gabor superlens implementa-
tions can be achieved by a Graphics Processing Unit (GPU).[165] 
Holographic computations integrating at a standard graphics 
pipeline enables real-time (>90 Hz) data processing.
2.4.2. Scripts
A script is a set of commands developed to test the functions of 
the written algorithm (e.g., in MATLAB, Python). The following 
scripts describe each step of the algorithmic testing process.
Test of the Gerchberg–Saxton Function: The output of this 
script consists of an optimized hologram that reconstructs a 
target image at the far field. This script has the following steps: 
i) a general user interface is utilized to retrieve an image, ii) 
the image is converted to grayscale and normalized, iii) the 
GS algorithm is executed with a random phase, the target, and 
10 cycles, iv) the retrieved hologram phase is normalized and 
saved on the hard drive, v) the hologram phase is utilized to 
retrieve the reconstruction through a FT, vi) the retrieved holo-
gram reconstruction is stored on hard drive, and vii) the signal-
to-noise ratio is calculated.
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463

--- Page 10 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (10 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
Test of the Fresnel and Gabor Superlens Functions: The compiled 
Fresnel and Gabor functions are run and tested in this section. 
These two scripts consist of the following steps: i) the Fresnel/
Gabor function is defined with a given SLM resolution, a SLM 
pixel pitch (a smaller pixel pitch of preferable, refer to Table 5 
pixel pitch comparison), one or more light source wavelengths 
(if two light sources are considered, two-color spatial multi-
plexing in the field of view can be achieved), and the desired 
focal distance, ii) the retrieved phase is redefined in the range of 
−π to π, and iii) the resulting digital image is saved on the hard 
drive to be implemented in the holography setup.[125,166]
Multilayer Holograms: To create multiple layers in the replay 
field, virtual Fresnel and Gabor superlens functions and a script 
are applied to define the focal distance for each holographic 
layer.[56] Furthermore, a single hologram or multiple holograms 
can be defined.[167] The lens maker’s formula allows for rec-
reating the experimental view of a physically applied Fresnel 
lens.[168] The multiple layers’ script consists of the following 
steps. i) The parameters are defined, including the resolution of 
the CGH (1080 × 1080 px), the pixel pitch (8 µm), and the wave-
length of the excitation source (671 nm).[169] The target complex 
amplitude distribution is defined as the amplitude ranging 
from 0 to 1. The optimal angle between the reference beam and 
the object beam was found to be 1.2°.[166] ii) With known focal 
lens length, the lens maker’s formula is applied to retrieve the 
focal distances of the zone plates. iii) A for loop is utilized to 
combine through an addition of the fields of each hologram: 
1) the images are retrieved, normalized, and raised according to 
the dimensions of the SLM (1080 × 1080 px), (2) the GS algorithm 
is applied with an random initial phase and the image target for 
a number of cycles (e.g., 10 iterations), 3) a Fresnel zone plate is 
created and added to the hologram, and (4) the retrieved holo-
gram is added to the previous hologram to create a layer-by-layer 
effect. iv) The image hologram is stored in the hard drive.[112,170]
Hologram Generation: The GS algorithm was the first method 
to optimize phase retrievals.[85] The algorithm operates by com-
paring phases of the several original images present in an image 
and their replay fields. In a CGH, the phase at the SLM and the 
phase in the replay field result are unknown during the compu-
tational GS process. The intensity of the SLM is programmed to 
1 in a loop to determine the unknown parameter of the phase 
of both the original image and its replay field.[166] During this 
computational process, the GS algorithm allocates a random 
phase to each pixel of the original image. The FFT is run to 
obtain the phase parameter in the replay field result.[116] This 
process is repeated several times, where each time the retrieved 
phase is allocated by the algorithm to each pixel of the original 
image, and a different parameter for the phase of the replay 
field is generated.[171] The GS algorithm represents an iterative 
process of the FT with specific boundary conditions at the input 
and output planes. The function at the input plane is retrieved 
when the target image at the output condition plane is assigned. 
In the case of an error between the reconstructed image in the 
replay field result and the original target image, the phase-only 
function is obtained.[107] Additionally, multiphase retrieval algo-
rithms, which contain several phase-only functions, are used to 
reconstruct the replay field as the target, where specific Fresnel 
holograms include the information of the original object.[155,172]
Image recreation systems could be achieved through 
monocular cues and binocular disparity.[173,174] Monocular cues, 
which were generated with 2D imaging, were visible with one 
eye, where the occlusion effect used layering to emphasize 
the object overlap in the fore- and backgrounds.[173] Pictorial 
depth cues were due to shading and perspective rendering. 
A dynamic version of the monocular cues was represented by 
the motion parallax, where objects at greater distance from the 
observer (>10 m) had less lateral movement than that of closer 
objects to the observer (<3 m). This method was achieved by 
the rotation or translation of a scene in 2D with parallax effect 
in the rendering process.[175,176] Original images could also be 
recreated through the binocular disparity (stereopsis), which 
defined a visual process for both eyes when a scene is viewed 
from slightly different angles.[174,177] This process recreated 
close to real-life holographic projections due to the meshing 
process of 2D scenes in one coherent depth-perceived visual 
response. Different layers could create holograms at different 
depths.[178] A modified GS algorithm was generated to create 
CGHs with depth by using a layering technique, which super-
imposed up to four holographic replay field layers.[163] In other 
studies, by superimposing layers with an optimized algorithm, 
the hologram generation time was reduced by 4 times for appli-
cation in dynamic 3D holographic displays and HUDs.[170,179]
The GS algorithm generating phase-only CGHs has fast cal-
culation ability due to an iterative Fourier transform process.[161] 
The underlying principle of the iterative Fourier transform 
algorithm is Fraunhofer diffraction, which limits the projection 
distance to the focal plane of the lens.[82] Hence, this algorithm 
is limited to the 2D plane as for 3D images, the light propa-
gation takes place in the near-field diffraction with the angular 
spectrum, the virtual Fresnel or Gabor superlenses, and the 
Fresnel diffraction.[180]
An angular spectrum method was developed to improve the 
image quality of multiplane holographic projections.[8] The ben-
efits of the angular spectrum method lie within the computation 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
Table 5.  Commercial amplitude and phase SLM displays.
Manufacturer
Wavelength [nm]
Panel resolution [px]
Panel active area [mm2]
Pixel pitch [µm]
Output frame rate [Hz]
References
Jasper Display
532/633
4096 × 2400
15.3 × 8.9
3.74
120
[105]
Hamamatsu
532–633
1272 × 1024
15.9 × 12.8
12.5
60
[106]
Jenoptik
430–1600
832 × 624
64 × 10
3.0
60
[107]
Santec
532, 800, 1064
1920 × 1200
15.3 × 9.6
8.0
60 or 120
[108]
Sintec Optronics
405–1550
512 × 512
7.6 × 7.6
15
44
[109]
Forth Dimension Displays
430–700
2048 × 2048
21.1 × 22.8
8.2
1000
[110]

--- Page 11 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (11 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
of diffraction pattern with a high numerical aperture and 
working in both paraxial fields and nonparaxial fields.[181] The 
Fresnel diffraction method is limited to the paraxial fields.[182] 
The angular spectrum method however suffers from speckle 
noise and image diffraction distance disturbances.[8]
A three-step hybrid algorithm was developed for multibeam 
steering. This algorithm generated reconstructed output fields 
with flexible power ratios. In addition, the algorithm balanced 
multiple indicators such as diffraction efficiency, crosstalk 
power, and the reconstructed root mean squared error.[183] This 
result was achieved with a three-step combination of the itera-
tive Fourier transform algorithm. A hybrid algorithm was used 
for error reduction due to convergence abilities and fast com-
putation speed. Compared to other algorithms, the iterative 
Fourier transform algorithm was susceptible to initial states 
and was not capable of solving a multitude of tasks.[116] Hence, 
the iterative Fourier transform algorithms were enhanced 
with a global optimization process with fitness functions to 
enhance search direction in order to tackle the multiple objec-
tives problem.[184] However, the speed of the overall algorithm 
reduced with the introduction of the global optimization algo-
rithm.[183] Both hybrid algorithms in combination generated a 
hologram, which had continuous phase due to the iterative FT 
algorithm and balanced multi-indicators quantifying the holo-
gram to 256 phase levels. The hybrid algorithm was a two-step 
iterative process, where the first one erased the background and 
in the second iteration enhanced the image depth of the chosen 
object by focusing on the signal-concentrated area.[183] The 
depth of both iteration steps could be enhanced with the root 
mean squared error function.[185] Another algorithm was devel-
oped based on the hybrid iterative FT algorithm with one addi-
tional step. The image plane was separated into the background 
area, the signal area, and the additional noise area. Each of the 
area was constrained by different amplitudes (Figure  4a,b).[8]  
An iterative FT algorithm was produced to create holograms 
that diffract the light into arbitrary 2D intensity profiles.[82] The 
intensity distributions outperformed the frequently used algo-
rithms by one and two orders of magnitude in accuracy and 
roughness, respectively. The central technique used in the algo-
rithm was mixed-region amplitude freedom. It consisted of a 
single mixing parameter controlling the relative distribution of 
optical power in two subsets: the signal region and the noise 
region of the output plane. Phase freedom was allowed eve-
rywhere in the output plane of the replay field, but amplitude 
freedom was permitted solely in the noise region to empha-
size the accuracy (Figure  4c).[184] This algorithm controlled 
the intensity in a bounded 2D subset of the focal plane with 
greater accuracy (>10%) than the GS algorithm. This single 
plane intensity profile algorithm could only be applied to 
create 2D arbitrary optical traps (Figure 4d).[186] Figure 4d illus-
trates the creation of 6 holograms able to diffract light into the 
6 chosen 2D intensity profiles. To create the mentioned holo-
grams, a mixed-region amplitude freedom (MRAF) algorithm 
was utilized.[187]
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
Figure 4.  Algorithmic holograms. a) Multiconstrain angular spectrum algorithm showing the signal (α), the background (β), and the noise (γ). b) Inten-
sity profiles with odd-shaped beams achieved with two SLMs. Reproduced with permission.[189] Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. c) The holographic 
double-plane HUD demonstration at near and far planes: 9.0 m on the left, near plane: 1.5 m on the right. d) Target intensity profiles to analyze the 
performance of the MRAF algorithm. The field of view (i–iv) is a 200 × 200 px and for (v) and (vi) 400 × 400 px. The grayscale represents intensity, where 
black corresponds to the regions of zero intensity. Reproduced with permission.[186] Copyright 2008, Optica Publishing Group. e) Intensity profiles for 
the MRAF algorithm based on the test target profiles from (d). Reproduced with permission.[186] Copyright 2008, Optica Publishing Group. f) Numerical 
and optical reconstruction results with Fourier domain segmentation method when viewing from (i, iv) left, (ii, v) center, and (iii, vi) right viewpoints. 
Reproduced with permission.[190] Copyright 2019, Optica Publishing Group.

--- Page 12 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (12 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
Algorithms were elaborated to spatially segment the CGH 
into multiple hologels, which captured the parallax views by 
perspective projections from the corresponding viewpoints.[188] 
These were based on stereograms such as spatially multi-
plexed 2D parallax views of a 3D scene. Spatial segmenting 
was achieved through computer graphics rendering techniques. 
These algorithms had the disadvantage of being view-dependent. 
The depth performance decreased during optical reconstruction 
process and needed multiviewpoint rendering.[170,175]
An algorithm was created to calculate photorealistic 3D 
CGHs with Fourier domain segmentation without the paraxial 
approximation, which was present in the stereogram-based 
algorithms.[163] Segmented angular spectrum layer-based algo-
rithm calculated partitioned elements in the Fourier domain. 
This segmentation could reduce aliasing errors by limiting the 
bandwidth of the transfer function and by extending the limited 
region of the conventional angular spectrum. This algorithm 
was compatible with computer graphics rendering techniques, 
which provided a smooth motion parallax with occlusion effect 
in the replay field results (Figure 4e). Figure 4e shows the inten-
sity profiles of the 2D objects from Figure 4d, proving that the 
MRAF algorithm was able to improve the results by two orders 
of magnitude on roughness compared to the GS algorithm 
and by roughly one order of magnitude on the accuracy of the 
results.[186] The numerical simulations Figure  4f(i–iii) and the 
optical experiments Figure  4f(iv–vi) demonstrated photoreal-
istic 3D images with depth information.[190]
The speckle noise appears due to the random and erratic 
phase distribution as significant intensity fluctuations occur 
in the reconstructed image.[164] The phase of the image directly 
influences the intensity of the points in between the sampling 
range as the amplitude may not be controlled on finite sam-
pling points in the hologram generation process.[191] The output 
light field is determined by the interpolation of the sampled 
points, which are based on the finite size of the generated holo-
gram.[8,183,192] To reduce the speckle noise, random-free phase 
(linear, quadratic, constant, and conical) is referred to an ini-
tial phase within the iteration algorithm. However, the speckle 
noise cannot be removed completely.
Achieving high accuracy replay field results requires the 
ability to arbitrarily manipulate the spatial full field informa-
tion of a light beam.[184] This was accomplished by manipu-
lating the amplitude and phase of the incoming light beam 
with two phase-only SLMs and without any phase iterative 
algorithm. This method generated multiple collinear orbital 
angular momentum beams, Laguerre–Gaussian beams, Bessel 
beams, and arbitrary beams with odd-shaped intensities.[189,193] 
Figure 5a,b shows the working mechanism of arbitrary manip-
ulation of amplitude and phase of a light beam with two cas-
caded SLMs. The polarization direction of the input light was 
set to 45° with respect to the x-direction, which was the working 
direction of the polarization-dependent SLM1. After the polar-
izer of 45° direction has been passed by the light beam, the 
light reached SLM2. In both systems, the light propagates 
from a collimator laser (1550 nm) (Figure 5a,b). The collimated 
light passes through the polarizer (Pol1) and a half-wave plate 
(HWP1). The crucial components in the optical setup are two 
phase-only SLMs. As the phase and amplitude might change 
upon light beam propagation between the two SLMs, lenses 
are added to develop two imaging systems with unit magnifi-
cation. The lenses facilitate the cancellation of spurious phase 
delays caused by the light propagation between the two SLMs 
in the optical assembly. Figure  5a shows a one-lens imaging 
system. The distance between the two SLMs is 60 cm. The focal 
length of the lens was 15 cm. In this system, the plane of the 
SLM1 images the plane of SLM2 with unit magnification. This 
optical arrangement can retrieve both amplitude and phase of 
the SLM1 plane at the position of the SLM2 plane. Figure 5b  
illustrates a 4f optical system with two lenses placed between 
the two SLMs separated by 60 cm and focal length of 15 cm. 
This optical arrangement also images the plane of SLM1 to the 
plane of SLM2 with unit magnification. In the optical assembly 
in Figure  5a(ii), no additional radial phase distribution was 
used as opposed to the optical system in Figure 5a(i).
Figure  5b(i,ii) illustrates the mechanism of the arbitrary 
full-field manipulation of a light beam technique used to inde-
pendently control the phase and amplitude. The symmetrical 
version of the iterative FT algorithm with phase and amplitude 
freedom and flexible weightings of the fitness function in the 
Genetic algorithm were utilized in combination. Figure 5b(iii) 
shows the basis for the hybrid algorithm. When a phase-only 
hologram was uploaded onto any position of the LCoS chip, 
multiple or a single waveband was reflected and switched from 
the shown input fiber port to an arbitrary multiple or single 
output port. The optical signals were angularly dispersed in the 
direction of the y-axis.[183] Figure  5c(i,ii) shows a multicasting 
hybrid algorithm principle, where a Gaussian beam travels 
from the fiber coupling microlens array through a grating. 
The optical signals with multiple wavelength channels were 
observed to angularly disperse in the y-axis direction. The optical 
signals were projected onto the LCoS chip that was placed 
at the back focal plane of a collimating lens and a cylindrical 
lens. This flexible power weighting allows for optimization 
of multicasting holograms, ensuring that intensity distribu-
tions match with the port location.[184] The circular symmetry of 
the zone plate algorithm calculated the CGH at high speed. A 
computer graphics technique evaluated the circular symmetry 
of the zone plates as fringe patterns formed by interferences 
of spherical waves originating from a single point cloud and a 
reference plane wave. When running Nishitsuji and co-workers’ 
algorithm on Intel Core i7-4790K Central Processing Unit 
(CPU) (4.0  GHz), the computational time for one CGH was 
12  ms.[194] This speed can cope with real-time reconstruction 
and interactive information presentation for multiple viewers.
3. Application Examples of AR and Machine 
Learning (ML) in HUDs
This section presents current and future application exam-
ples of 3D holographic HUDs. The possibilities of 3D HUDs 
to achieve augmented and mixed reality projections are dis-
cussed. The role of AR in HUD applications is to increase 
driving efficiency by reducing the time spent by the driver to 
look at the built-in display or the windshield for navigation 
purposes. AR can serve as natural medium for the driver to 
increase road obstacle alertness and reduce driving stress levels 
with virtual objects projected into the driver’s field of view. 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463

--- Page 13 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (13 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
Additionally, this section discusses the outlook in machine 
learning algorithms for gesture recognition and automatic 
obstacle detection.
AR enriches the 3D world by superimposing computer-gen-
erated virtual objects in real time into the environment. These 
3D virtual objects can serve as additive information to warn, 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
Figure 5.  Schematics of different optical system arrangements. a) Experimental setup with two SLMs. (i) One-lens imaging system. (ii) 4f lens imaging 
system: half-wave plate (HWP), collimator (Col), polarizer (Pol). Reproduced with permission.[189] Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. b) Principle of the 
arbitrary full-field manipulation of a light beam with two phase-only SLMs, which control both the amplitude and the phase. (i) Phase-only manipulation. 
(ii) Independent manipulation of the phase and the amplitude. Reproduced with permission.[189] Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. c) Hybrid algorithm 
illustrated with a Gaussian beam traveling from a fiber coupling microlens array through a grating. Reproduced with permission.[184] Copyright 2020, IEEE.

--- Page 14 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (14 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
inform, or entertain the user. Current AR technologies do 
not require stationary displays as carriers, instead they can be 
embedded into the real world with a holographic optical system. 
Spatially embedded virtual objects contain or transfer data 
about associated and known real objects, locations, or events. 
With AR technologies, data have the potential to generate 
personalized projection layout based on the driver’s needs and 
preferences; hence, the urge of gazing at in-car displays could 
be reduced. Enhanced driver perception can be achieved with 
the combination of objects or events at their inherent location, 
thus condensing the displayed information. A study was con-
ducted with 20 participants within a high-fidelity driving simu-
lator to compare the fully embedded gesture recognition system 
to a traditional head-down display interface.[195] A reduced colli-
sion probability of 90% was found on a motorway compared to 
the traditional HUD system. A multimodal HUD interface with 
gesture recognition was proposed to enhance human responses 
in situations of danger.[196] The gesture control was based on 
cell division for increased accuracy (Figure 6a).
AI fast deep learning algorithms can detect hidden road 
objects and holographically project 3D images into the driver’s 
gaze. Machine learning algorithms can predict complex road 
scenarios and elaborate a safe travel plan for the vehicle with a 
single convolutional neural network based on the open source 
Caffe deep learning library.[197] AR can allow for the incorpo-
ration of driver and safety-related information into the auto-
motive domain such as lane highlighting and gesture control 
(Figure 6b,c). However, an abundance of information offered to 
the driver within a modern automotive environment requires 
the driver to multitask, overwhelming the cognitive load that 
increases the probability of collision.[195]
4. Application Examples of Virtual Shadow 
Casting HUDs
This section discusses examples of 3D HUD applications, 
which include virtual shadow warning systems that can be 
observed by both the driver and other road participants such 
as pedestrians, bicyclists, and other vehicle drivers. Virtual 
shadow warning systems may increase situation awareness 
and reduce traffic accidents. Stereovision-based algorithms 
have been demonstrated in experimental outdoor studies 
under several weather conditions such as rainy, foggy, and 
snowy during both day and night.[198] Additionally, virtual 
warning systems are based on computer vision, which also 
provides vehicle detection, distance estimation, and a real-
time data stream from mounted cameras by using monocular 
vision. The real-time data transfer can be implemented for 
automotive HUDs. The time effectiveness of the data stream 
is based on processing of 25–28 fps when using one monoc-
ular camera on a Core i5 2.7  GHz Personal Computer (PC) 
with 8 GB of Random Access Memory (RAM). HUDs can be 
utilized for AR pedestrian warning systems by using in-vehicle 
volumetric HUDs that provide spatial virtual shadows. A user 
interface was proposed for cross traffic alert systems by using 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
Figure 6.  Gesture control recognition schematics. a) Right-handed finger gestures for system automation for HUDs with AR content. Reproduced with 
permission.[196] Copyright 2020, Oxford University Press. b) Road obstacle detection with machine learning algorithms. c) 3D Augmented reality HUD 
navigating through public roads.

--- Page 15 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (15 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
an AR HUD compatible with both the driver’s cognitive pro-
cess and physical reality of driving environment (Figure 7a).[17] 
This design involved casting virtual shadows of approaching 
obstacles through an AR HUD (Figure  7b).[199,200] The calcu-
lated minimum distance for AR holograms for urban traffic 
is 5 m (18  km h−1, 1 s driving time) with a field of view of 
40°, and this distance for highway traffic is 80 m (144 km h−1, 
2 s security distance time) with a field of view of 20°.[201] Cur-
rent near-eye HUDs achieve a field of view of 45° but limit the 
driver’s eye box to 7 × 7 mm2 with a resolution of 1280 × 1024 px. 
Recently, an eye box size of 25 × 36 mm2 was achieved in the 
far-field HUD setting with a resolution of 3840 × 2160 px. 
These inclusive studies serve as a basis for the development 
of virtual shadow warning systems in the transportation 
sector. Existing pedestrian collision warning systems incor-
porate either visual, auditory, or both alarms to inform the 
driver about upcoming obstacles. However, these methods 
do not give insights into the exact location of the obstacles, 
which are crucial for the driver to respond accordingly. Volu-
metric HUDs capable of providing spatial information based 
on conformal graphics integrated into the HUD can result 
in increased safety and security in roads.[200,202] The design 
idea can be leveraged to create reliable and safer AR interfaces 
for drivers.
5. Panoramic Holographic Projections
This section discusses the experimental strategies to increase 
the driver’s field of view for the 3D holographic projections. 
Increasing the field of view results in situation awareness 
without causing driver distraction. A wide field of view in LCD 
displays originates from the diffused light sources in the back 
of the LCD panel, which randomizes the phase of propagating 
waves. The holographic setup using only coherent light sources 
such as lasers or LEDs has a limited field of view based on the 
SLM display size and pixel period in the holographic setup.
A conventional LCoS SLM is 10 × 20 mm2, has a pixel period 
of 8 µm and a corresponding diffraction angle of 1.9°.[204] Sev-
eral studies introduced techniques to overcome the limited field 
of view by introducing multiple SLMs in different arrange-
ments.[170,181,194,204–206] Figure 8a–c shows the relation between a 
single SLM or multiple SLMs in different configurations.
Figure  8a depicts the concept of capturing the entire field 
of view through the entire bandwidth of the SLM. When the 
viewer moves away from the designated field of view, the band-
width for reconstructing the objects decreases. This reduces the 
sharpness of the image in addition to making some parts of 
the object invisible. This dilemma is caused by the narrow dif-
fraction angle and the size of a single SLM. Figure 8b shows 
a holography configuration that has multiple SLMs. A planar 
arrangement of the three SLMs does not increase the field of 
view for the viewer as only the SLM in the middle is contrib-
uting to the entire reconstruction of the object. To increase 
the field of view, a curved arrangement of SLMs is elabo-
rated (Figure 8c). In a circular configuration, the field of view 
increases significantly compared to the planar one. This config-
uration allows for implementing 3D holographic displays as the 
reconstruction appears binocularly, where the viewer can rotate 
around the reconstructed object within the field of view of 
24°.[204] Figure 8d shows that the beam splitter aligns the active 
areas of the SLMs (without the frames) for a continuous field 
of view. A cone mirror can be utilized to direct the light into all 
SLMs. A beam splitter was placed between the SLMs to create a 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
Figure 7.  Analysis of automotive HUDs. a) Current industrial HUD systems: (i) windshield HUD and (ii, iii) foldable translucent panel HUD. Repro-
duced with permission.[203] Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. b) Visualization of the operability of the current industrial HUD in a driving situation. 
Reproduced with permission.[205] Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.

--- Page 16 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (16 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
gap illusion. Commercial SLMs are mounted in frames, which 
discontinue the field of view. A cone mirror is utilized to direct 
light into all SLMs. The SLMs are slightly tilted to prevent the 
optical components from blocking the view as the reconstructed 
objects appear slightly above the setup. In volumetric displays, 
each volume element in a 3D scenery emits visible light. This 
ability to project volumetric autostereoscopic images has appli-
cation in automotive HUDs.[207] To expand the limited field of 
view by a few degrees, which is limited by the use on one SLM, 
a curved array of twelve SLMs was developed to reduce the spa-
tial bandwidth of SLMs and to obtain a greater number of data 
points compared to a single SLM (Figure 8e).[181]
From the theory of holographic stereograms, it is vital to 
restrict the angular spectrum of the object wave.[208] Holograms 
were generated to form triangle-based mesh-modeled 3D sur-
face objects.[209] The angular spectrum equals the object wave, 
which passes through a viewing window within holographic 
stereograms.[210] The mathematical representation of the light 
field radiated from a unit triangular facet is shown with surface 
diffusiveness, the so-called occlusion.[136] Figure 9a shows two 
hands composed of 2436 triangles. To project a triangle mesh-
modeled 3D object, an incident He–Ne laser was used to modu-
late a phase-only SLM (Epson L3P06) with pixel size of 12 µm. 
The 3D object was optically Fourier transformed by a singlet 
with a focal length of 50 mm.
A Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) camera (Kodak Megaplus 
ES 1.0, pixel size = 9 µm) was used to capture the image light 
fields at different defocus points. Figure  9b–e illustrates the 
geometry and mesh analysis of the chosen object with refer-
ence frames. The surface diffusiveness factor was set to 5 and 
the phase distribution was designed to generate shade effects. 
The amplitude (Figure 9f(i)) and phase (Figure 9f(ii)) distribu-
tions of the angular spectrum are presented. The size of the 
generated hologram was 501 × 501 px.[209] Figure 9f(iii,iv) pre-
sents the simulated results with focus on the right and focus 
on the left hands, respectively. Figure  9f(v,vi) presents the 
experimental results.[209] Figure  9f illustrates numerical (ii–iv) 
and experimental (v, vi) reconstructions validating a 3D model, 
which confirms the monocular cues (defocus effect).[211]
The angular spectrum equals to the object wave, which 
passes through a viewing window in a generated holographic 
stereogram. Figure  10 shows the 3D object arrangement 
and the definition of central directions corresponding to 
the central frequencies of the angular spectrum in the local 
view. In the dynamic holographic stereogram, every central 
direction was rotated at the interval of an angle equivalent 
to 0.705°, generating 36 possible views when 12 SLMs were 
adopted. Figure  10a illustrates the object arrangements and 
the 36 viewing angles with a combined field of view of 39.7°. 
Figure 10b shows the numerical simulation results from the 
viewing directions (left, center, right). Figure 10c presents the 
experimental results from 4 different viewing windows, each 
having a different field of view with visible zero order in the 
middle of the image.[181]
A conical surface with anisotropic diffusion character-
istics for incoming light rays was created to project a 3D 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
Figure 8.  Projection systems with different SLM arrangements. Schematic of the field of view of a) a single SLM, b) multiple SLMs, and c) multiple 
SLMs in circular configuration. Reproduced with permission.[204] Copyright 2011, Optica Publishing Group. d) Optical setup using multiple SLMs in 
circular configuration with a beam splitter to align the active areas of the SLMs without discontinuation. Reproduced with permission.[204] Copyright 
2011, Optica Publishing Group. e) Dynamic holographic stereogram achieved by a curved array of several SLMs. Reproduced with permission.[181] 
Copyright 2008, Optica Publishing Group.

--- Page 17 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (17 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
scene with the help of 288 projectors spaced at 1.25° (7.4 mm) 
pitch.[212] Dynamic holographic stereogram with several 
SLMs had a field of view of 22.8°. To expand this number, 
a method was developed to project floating 3D images on a 
flat and empty tabletop surface by utilizing static compo-
nents (Figure 11a).[206] This method allowed multiple viewers 
to observe the projected 3D image from any angle, not lim-
iting the field of view without the need of 3D glasses.[206] This 
technique provided full-color animations with interactive 
contents to be projected for mixed reality applications. The 
illumination process was reproduced by a conical screen 
and multiple projectors, providing a horizontal parallax in 
circular (Figure  11b). The viewer’s eye observes the slit-like 
parts of each image projected at any position of the annular 
viewing area of the table. Hence, the eye collects fractional 
slit-like images from different projectors and assembles an 
appropriate image from the perspective of the eye at each 
viewpoint.[213] With the circularly arranged projectors and the 
conical anisotropic rear-projection screen, 288 multiperspec-
tive images were used to reconstruct the 360° 3D images, pro-
viding parallax without glasses. 3D models were taken as a 
base to project 3D objects (h = 5 cm, w = 10 cm).
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
Figure 9.  Triangle-based mesh-modeled 3D surface objects. a) Projection image of mesh-modeled two hands directed toward the viewer. b) Triangle 
mesh-modeled 3D object of two hands. c) Triangle mesh surface-polyhedron objects in the global coordinate system. d) Local coordinate system of 
the kth unit triangle. e) Relationship between the global and the local coordinate systems. f) CGH of the 3D mesh model: (i) amplitude and (ii) phase 
distributions of the angular spectrum, respectively, (iii, iv) simulated results with focus on the right and focus on the left hands, respectively, (v, vi) 
experimental results. Reproduced with permission.[209] Copyright 2008, Optica Publishing Group.
Figure 10.  Configuration of the objects to be projected and the experimental results. a) Object arrangement with viewing windows 1–36 with a total field 
of view of 39.7°. b) Simulation results of the different viewing positions of the objects. c) Experimental results obtained from different viewing positions 
of the object (left, center left, center right, right) with visible zero order. Reproduced with permission.[181] Copyright 2008, Optica Publishing Group.

--- Page 18 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (18 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
A 360° tabletop electronic holographic display was devel-
oped.[214] This system had enlarged 3.2 in. holographic images 
and a 45° oblique viewing angle, which was not visually dis-
torted. This system was created through four synchronized 
high-speed digital micromirror displays. These were optically 
calibrated to comprise a two-by-two multiple-vision panel, 
facilitating the holographic image enlargement together with 
time-division multiplexing of the holographic image content. 
The optical layout of the designed system was composed of 
parabolic mirrors and an aspheric lens to deliver the enlarged 
optical images. Figure  12a,b shows the effect of the inserted 
aspheric lens between the parabolic mirrors with a ray tracing 
analysis. An integrated center of rotational axis, an aspheric 
lens (L8), resulted in a focused light beam.
A multiprojection of lenticular displays was developed to 
construct 50 dense views.[215] This was achieved with one len-
ticular lens pitch covering 5.333 subpixels, a screen resolu-
tion of 1920 × 1080 px, and a maximum clear displayed depth 
of 24.8 cm. This technology generated 3D images by multiple 
view flat-panel displays, which were superimposed on a single 
screen using a multiprojection system. The eye boxes of the 
flat-panel 3D display were produced in the pupils of the pro-
jection lenses and imaged to the viewing space with a screen 
lens. Sixteen flat-panel 3D displays with 16 views were used to 
generate a multiview display counting 256 views. The resolu-
tion was 256 × 192 px and the screen size was 26.2 cm, showing 
a full-color 3D object (5 × 10 cm2) rendered from 3D models.[216] 
The horizontal interval of the eye boxes was 1.3 mm. This could 
have a positive effect for accommodating the HUD within the 
car as the lenticular arrays have the potential to project the laser 
light within a certain angular range for the viewer. The benefits 
for implementing such lenses could accommodate the HUD 
for a better fit in the car. Additionally, the driver would only see 
the HUD object in a certain area of the head position to prevent 
distraction.
6. Holographic Video Displays
This section introduces video projection capabilities for holo-
graphic HUDs. Video projections allow for perceiving road 
obstacles in full depth and within a 360° view. Video projec-
tions enable the driver to assess the hidden road obstacles and 
react accordingly. Holography allows for creating multidimen-
sional images at different depths as overlayered objects for 3D 
AR applications.[178] Algorithms can add an infinite number 
of layers to facilitate the AR experience in the replay field in 
full color.[217] This can be achieved without visual fatigue or 
glasses. A 3D femtosecond laser technology was fabricated 
with a high-aspect ratio of up to 15 nanopillars (w = 390 nm, 
l = 780 nm) meta-atom with different heights (3.40–4.45 µm) to 
reduce shadowing effects.[218] The results achieved a hologram 
(2.5 × 2.5 mm2) consisting of 2000 × 2000 px. In terms of holo-
graphic video projection, 3D motion pictures were projected to 
2.5 mm3 with one SLM and two parabolic mirrors.[194] A holo-
gram generation time of 12  ms was achieved by employing 
4 CPU cores.[194] High-resolution images (25 frames s−1) were 
taken from objects (football, basketball) to create videos. An 
orbital angular momentum diffuser array with random phase 
function sampled each image frame (Figure  13a).[218]  A high-
resolution (10  000 × 10  000 px) complex-amplitude orbital 
angular momentum multiplexed hologram was generated. 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
Figure 11.  Construction of the 360° 3D images. a) Light-field reproduction of 3D images using the conical screen technique with multiple projectors. 
b) 3D objects projected from 3D models at the tabletop using the conical screen technique with multiple projectors. Scale bar: 5 cm. Reproduced with 
permission.[206] Copyright 2016, Optica Publishing Group.

--- Page 19 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (19 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
The numerical results and optical results are shown as a 
holographic video display (Figure 13b,c). Each video contained 
100 image frames at 260 px per 25.4 mm.[218]
By duplicating and adding phase shifts to the optical path, 
including eye tracking to compensate for the low diffraction 
angle, and to increase the eye box and size of HUDs, large 
arrays of SLMs have been assembled.[219] Industrial devices 
for spatial light modulation such as microelectromechanical 
systems, bulk-wave acousto-optic and liquid crystal modula-
tors present challenges for integration in holographic video 
projections.[220] A major obstacle is the high cost in the 
mass manufacturing of the SLMs. Low-cost SLMs were fab-
ricated with aggregated temporal bandwidth of more than 
50 bln px s−1.[221] The SLM assembly exploited the guided-
wave phenomenon. This phenomenon specializes in aniso-
tropic mode conversion to eliminate the zero-order undif-
fracted light spot and tunable wavelength filtering to gen-
erate simultaneous and superimposed modulation of color 
signals (Figure  14a–c).[221] Figure  14a shows a holographic 
stereogram created with a single laser light (red) anisotropic 
waveguide modulator with an overall display of 35 × 20 mm2. 
Figure  14b shows the single channel and Figure  14c illus-
trates a superimposed (red, green, blue (RGB)) stereogram. 
The subsystem components of the SLM consisted of an ani-
sotropic leaky-mode coupler, which had a proton-exchanged 
channel waveguide on a LiNbO3 substrate with a transducer 
within one single end.[222]
This waveguide is only able to hide the light in one polari-
zation due to its anisotropic behavior. The transducer gener-
ated surface acoustic waves when excited by a radio frequency 
signal, which propagated collinearly with the light trapped in 
the anisotropic waveguide.[223] Large outputs creating persis-
tence of vision were generated with anisotropic mode couplers. 
This allowed the development of holographic video projec-
tions in an analog device. The viewing angle, the frame rate, 
the image extent, and vertical resolution can be interchanged 
within the bandwidth.[221]
Currently, a frame rate of 9523 frames s−1 and 228 different 
holographic frames are achieved through high-speed dynamic 
laser beam modulation and space channel metasurfaces.[224,225] 
For real-time video projections in HUDs, the continuous depth 
sensation and accuracy in the replay field have a profound 
impact. An optical setup was utilized in combination with a 
deep-learning-based CGH pipeline consisting of 4000 pairs of 
RGB-depth images.[226] The optical setup was capable of synthe-
sizing a photorealistic color 3D hologram from a single RGB-
depth image in real time. Figure 14d presents a 2D target image 
for testing the spatial resolution of the optical setup of 1920 × 
1080 px at 60  Hz. Figure  14e shows the convolutional-neural-
network (CNN)-predicted hologram with antialiasing double 
phase method.
To incorporate holographic video projection in automo-
tive HUDs, the requirements for safety, security, and comfort 
should be assessed. There is a trade-off between the 3D dis-
play size and the field of view of the driver resulting from the 
spatiotemporal resolution of industrial displays. To bridge this 
trade-off, a technique of combining digitally designed holo-
graphic optical elements with digital holographic projection 
has been developed.[227] An enlarged holographic image (10 × 
10 cm2) with 77 bln px of wavefront information was achieved. 
The advantage is that the display size and the field of view for 
the driver can be designed independently; hence, the enhance-
ment of the display size can accelerate the adoption of holo-
graphic video projection in automotive HUDs. Another crucial 
parameter for the adoption of automotive holographic video 
HUDs is the hologram generation time. By combining double 
random phase encoding techniques with optimized random 
phases, fast encryption and decryption were achieved.[228] 
Color phase-only holograms with a LCoS SLM was generated 
in HUDs. To address the limited field of view of the driver, a 
holographic wide angle display (306 × 161 mm2) at a 700 mm 
distance was generated.[229] This setup included a single Fou-
rier lens imaging system, a 4K SLM, a frequency filter utilizing 
complex coding, and nonparaxial diffraction.
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
Figure 12.  Comparison of the optical paths with ray tracing. a) Conventional arrangement of the parabolic mirrors where the optical rays at the top 
diverge. b) Parabolic mirrors with the aspheric lens, where the rays at the top converge into the position of the viewing window. Reproduced with 
permission[214] Copyright 2016, Optica Publishing Group.

--- Page 20 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (20 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
7. Conclusions and Future Directions
Customizable 2D windshield displays have been developed to 
enhance the information intake of the driver.[112] However, the 
impact of AR on the driver while operating a vehicle on public 
roads is not fully understood.[230] Full AR in 3D with depth 
perception has been created to project the visual information 
on the road within the driver’s gaze in AR applications.[231] 
Layered architectures can add virtual objects matching in size 
and distance with real-life road objects into the driver’s field 
of view.[160,170] To display road information, LiDAR sensing can 
leverage both image and 3D point cloud information, but also 
can provide accurate moving object detection and grid detection 
for localization and mapping.[3,19] LiDAR can be incorporated 
in future 3D point cloud data systems and into accurate naviga-
tion maps.[232] New opportunities in HUDs range from design 
factors to functionality to the integration of new content con-
nected with the urban environment into the driver’s space. Fur-
ther analysis of the placement of the content on the windshield 
and as AR projections in the driver’s field could include behav-
ioral studies, neurodiversity studies, and system engineering 
studies. The content could be projected according to the driver’s 
understandability of the provide personalized information, 
overall safety, and user satisfaction. Ultrafast switching holo-
graphic AR video displays may project 360° road objects into 
the driver’s field of view by using high-bandwidth metasurface 
holograms.[233] The physical mechanism of a 64-level complex-
amplitude-based orbital angular momentum multiplexing 
holography technique with 3D metasurfaces can independently 
control phase and amplitude of the transmitted light.[218] Cur-
rent industrial modulators used for holographic video HUDs 
have limitations such as i) high cost, ii) low diffraction angles, 
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
Figure 13.  Replay field of results showing the physical mechanism of complex-amplitude-based orbital angular momentum multiplexing holographic 
applications in video displays. a) Algorithm of a complex-amplitude orbital angular momentum multiplexed hologram utilizing image frames of 
“football” and “basketball” videos at two image planes. R1 and Rn represent different random phase functions. b) High-resolution (10 000 × 10 000 px) 
complex-amplitude orbital angular momentum multiplexed holograms. c) Optical results of the holographic video displays. Reproduced with permis-
sion.[218] Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.

--- Page 21 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (21 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
iii) suboptimal scalability for mass manufacturing, iv) rela-
tively low bandwidth, v) persistence of quantization noise, vi) 
unwanted diffracted orders, and vii) the zero-order undiffracted 
light spot. The cost and optical system complexity of holo-
graphic HUDs originate from the compensation for the issues 
regarding the zero-order spot.
Layered 3D holographic projections could be optimized 
through both the computational and the experimental 
approaches. The accuracy of the replay field images could be 
enhanced with a time-efficient algorithm to spatially slice the 
hologram into holographic elements (hologels) by using mul-
tiple viewpoint rendering and providing motion parallax with 
an occlusion effect.[170,185] The slices can provide accurate depth 
cues with computer graphics rendering techniques for pro-
ducing high-quality 3D images at a minimal computing load. 
The optimization of the computational algorithms is a prom-
ising solution as layering techniques show limitations in replay 
field size. Existing layering algorithms can be integrated with 
the dynamic 3D holography with high frame rates to produce 
video projections in the visible range.[225,234] To achieve appli-
cations of holographic video HUDs in vehicles, an important 
step is the secure information management. For example, 
3D hologram projection techniques can be combined with 
optical information security. An optical security technique can 
be realized with real-time encryption–decryption in combina-
tion with experimental optical projection methods to generate 
color holographic videos.[235] Personal driver data can be inte-
grated into point cloud storage methods to share vehicle and 
driver data with the smart urban environment. This, however, 
would require faster algorithm processing methods than GPU 
systems and accuracy of the replay field video projections 
should be enhanced. Legislative requirements must be met for 
the resolution of the field of view of driver for 2D windshield 
projections. AR HUDs can be integrated into in-car display 
systems with secure requirements such as wide field of view 
to detect obstacles and estimate the driving situation. Future 
legislative requirements should be developed for safe automo-
tive video and AR HUDs to prevent the driver not to suffer 
from fatigue due to changing views. Different optical compo-
nent arrangements such as the incorporation of several SLMs 
and additional convex lenses allow for increasing the field of 
view for the driver. A panoramic field of view of 100° and an 
Figure 14.  Photorealistic 3D holograms. a) Monochrome holographic stereograms made with a single channel anisotropic waveguide modulator in 
a display (35 × 20 mm2). (i) Intended output projection, (ii) zero-order reflection, (iii) unwanted conjugate image projection, (iv) higher order image 
projection and quantization noise, and (v) diffracted higher order resulting from modular pixel structure. Reproduced with permission.[221] Copyright 
2013, Springer Nature. b) Holographic stereogram reproduced with red laser light. Reproduced with permission.[221] Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. 
c) Holographic stereogram with different colors created by superimposed modulation of red, green, and blue lights. Reproduced with permission.[221] 
Copyright 2Springer Nature. d) A 2D target image for testing the spatial resolution of the optical setup. Reproduced with permission.[226] Copyright 
2021, Springer Nature. e) A photograph of the CNN-predicted hologram with antialiasing double phase method. The insets (yellow and blue) show the 
magnified regions. Reproduced with permission.[226] Copyright 2021, Springer Nature.

--- Page 22 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (22 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
all-round view with holographic video projection of 360° field 
of view are achievable. This is a crucial step toward a full 
obstacle assessment and could be incorporated into legislative 
requirements.
Holographic HUDs can aid in providing safer and inclusive 
transportation. The implementation of liquid-crystal lenses 
with varying focal distances, the so-called “zoomable HUDs” 
are promising directions to address multilayered AR systems 
in HUDs.[77,236] Furthermore, the integration of parallel pro-
cessing for algorithms could address remaining challenges 
of the hologram generation process in terms of computation 
time.[237] Positive measures can be implemented for equal 
opportunities on public roads for people with visual and move-
ment impairments toward inclusive transportation.[238] Finally, 
ML could be utilized in HUD for intelligent collision avoiding, 
visual enhancements, and support for people with neurodi-
verse conditions.[239] HUDs integrated in the transportation 
sector with various features including ML, virtual shadow 
casting systems, and metamaterials could realize customiz-
able, transformative image projection capabilities to enhance 
road safety.
Acknowledgements
J.S. thanks the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council 
(Grant No. EP/S022139/1) and the Foundation of German Business 
(SDW) for research funding.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Keywords
automotive head-up displays, computer-generated holograms, light 
sources, liquid crystal on silicon, spatial light modulators
Received: December 23, 2021
Revised: February 1, 2022
Published online: 
[1]	 a) F. Kuhnert, C. Stürmer, A. Koster, Five Trends Transforming the 
Automotive Industry, PricewaterhouseCoopers GmbH, Berlin, Ger-
many 2018; b) Global Status Report on Road Safety, World Health 
Organisation, Geneva 2018.
[2]	 J.  Kocić, N.  Jovičić, V.  Drndarević a) presented at 26th Telecom-
munications Forum (TELFOR), Belgrade, Serbia, November 2018; 
b) I.  Politis, P.  Langdon, D.  Adebayo, M.  Bradley, P. J.  Clarkson, 
L.  Skrypchuk, A.  Mouzakitis, A.  Eriksson, J. W.  Brown, K.  Revell, 
presented at 23rd Int. Conf. Intelligent User Interfaces, Tokyo, 
Japan, March 2018.
[3]	 Z.  Wang, Y.  Wu, Q.  Niu, Multi-Sensor Fusion in Automated 
Driving: A Survey, IEEE Access 2019, 8, 2847.
[4]	 S. G.  Klauer, F.  Guo, B. G.  Simons-Morton, M. C.  Ouimet, 
S. E. Lee, T. A. Dingus, N. Engl. J. Med. 2014, 370, 54.
[5]	 V.  Neale, T.  Dingus, S.  Klauer, J.  Sudweeks, M.  Goodman. 
An overview of the 100-car naturalistic study and findings. National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Paper, 2005, 5, p.0400.
[6]	 S. G. Hosking, K. L. Young, M. A. Regan, Hum. Factors 2009, 51, 
582.
[7]	 V. K. Lee, C. R. Champagne, L. H. Francescutti, Can. Fam. Physician 
2013, 59, 723.
[8]	 C.-Y. Shen, Y. Cheng, S.-H. Huang, Y.-P. Huang, presented at SID 
Symposium Digest of Technical Papers, Book 3: Display Systems 
Posters: AR/VR/MR, San Jose, USA, May 2019.
[9]	 A. Kun, H. van der Meulen, C. Janssen, in Proc. 9th Int. Driving 
Symp. Human Factors Driver Assessment, Training, Vehicle 
Design: Driving Assessment, Vol. 200, Manchester Village, VT 
June 2017. pp. 200-206
[10]	 R. Fisher, Aircraft Head-Up Displays from Refractors to Holograms, 
Vol. 10263, SPIE, Los Angeles, CA 1992.
[11]	 M. Ablaßmeier, T. Poitschke, F. Wallhoff, K. Bengler, G. Rigoll, pre-
sented at 2007 IEEE Int. Conf. Multimedia Expo, Beijing, China, 
July 2007.
[12]	 F.  Nobis, M.  Geisslinger, M.  Weber, J.  Betz, M.  Lienkamp, pre-
sented at Sensor Data Fusion: Trends, Solutions, Applications 
(SDF), Bonn, Germany, October 2019.
[13]	 S. Okabayashi, M. Furukawa, M. Sakata, T. Hatada, Driver’s Ability 
to Recognize the Forward View and Head-Up Display Images in 
Automobiles, Journal of Light & Visual Environment 1992, 16, 13.
[14]	 Y. J.  Kim, H. S.  Yoo, presented at Int. Conf. Intelligent Human 
Computer Interaction, Daegu, South Korea, November 2020. 
pp. 335-345
[15]	 J.  Sodnik, C.  Dicke, S.  Tomazic, M.  Billinghurst, Int. J. Hum.-
Comput. Stud. 2008, 66, 318.
[16]	 M.  Weihrauch, G.  Meloeny, T.  Goesch, The First Head Up 
Display Introduced by General Motors, SAE [Tech. Pap.] 1989, 
890288. https://doi.org/10.4271/890288.
[17]	 V. Charissis, M. Naef, presented at IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symp., 
Istanbul, Turkey, June 2007.
[18]	 S. Sechrist, Inf. Disp. 2017, 33, 18.
[19]	 E. Štrumbelj, I. Kononenko, Knowl. Inf. Syst. 2014, 41, 647.
[20]	 H.  Bast, D.  Delling, A.  Goldberg, M.  Müller-Hannemann, 
T.  Pajor, P.  Sanders, D.  Wagner, R. F.  Werneck, in Route Plan-
ning in Transportation Networks, Algorithm Engineering: Selected 
Results and Surveys (Eds: L. Kliemann, P. Sanders), Springer 
International Publishing, Cham,  2016, 9220, p. 19. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-49487-6_2.
[21]	 L. 
Skrypchuk, 
A. 
Mouzakitis, 
P. 
Langdon, 
P. 
Clarkson, 
a) P.  Langdon, J.  Lazar, A.  Heylighen, H.  Dong (eds), presented 
at Cambridge Workshop Universal Access Assistive Technology, 
Cambridge, UK, February 2018; b) S.  Keates, P. J.  Clarkson, 
L.-A.  Harrison, P.  Robinson, presented at Proc. 2000 Conf. 
­Universal Usability, Arlington, VA, November 2000.
[22]	 M.  Tonnis, C.  Sandor, G.  Klinker, C.  Lange, H.  Bubb, presented 
at Fourth IEEE ACM Int. Symp. Mixed Augmented Reality 
(ISMAR’05), Vienna, Austria, October 2005.
[23]	 B. Tayebi, Y. Jeong, J. Han, Single-shot multiple-color holography of 
single neuron using spatial frequency multiplexing, in Frontiers in 
Optics / Laser Science, OSA Technical Digest (Optica Publishing 
Group, 2018), paper JTu2A.122. https://doi.org/10.1364/FIO.2018.
JTu2A.122.
[24]	 R.  Kovordányi, T.  Alm, K.  Ohlsson, presented at 2006 IEEE 
­Intelligent Vehicles Symp., Meguro-Ku, Japan,  2006.
[25]	 R.  Lagoo, V.  Charissis, D. K.  Harrison, Mitigating Driver’s Dis-
traction: Automotive Head-Up Display and Gesture Recognition 
System, IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine 2019, 8, 79.
[26]	 Y. C. Liu, M. H. Wen, Mixed Factorial Analysis of In-Vehicle Infor-
mation Systems: Age, Driving Behavior, and Task Performance, 
5th International Conference, CCD 2013, Held as Part of HCI Interna-
tional 2013, Las Vegas, NV, USA, July 21-26, 2013, Proceedings, Part II, 
2013, 8024, 303–3011. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-39137-8_34.
[27]	 G. Jakus, C. Dicke, J. Sodnik, Appl. Ergon. 2015, 46, 184.

--- Page 23 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (23 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
[28]	 W. Wu, F. Blaicher, J. Yang, T. Seder, D. Cui, in Proc. 2009 Workshop 
Ambient Media Computing, Association for Computing Machinery, 
Beijing, China 2009, p. 21.
[29]	 K.  Li, Y.  Geng, A.  Yöntem, D.  Chu, V.  Meijering, E.  Dias, 
L.  Skrypchuk, Head-up display with dynamic depth-variable 
viewing effect, Optik 2020, 221, 165319.
[30]	 T.  Langner, D.  Seifert, B.  Fischer, D.  Goehring, T.  Ganjineh, 
R.  Rojas, presented at 2016 IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics Automation 
(ICRA), Stockholm, Sweden,  2016.
[31]	 C. M.  Bigler, P.-A.  Blanche, K.  Sarma, Holographic waveguide 
heads-up display for longitudinal image magnification and pupil 
expansion, Applied Optics 2018, 57, 2007.
[32]	 S. R. Soomro, H. Urey, J. Inf. Disp. 2020, 21, 93.
[33]	 J. S. Wolffsohn, N. A. McBrien, G. K. Edgar, T. Stout, Ophthalmic 
Physiol. Opt. 1998, 18, 243.
[34]	 H.  Nishio, Y.  Takaki "Development of super-multiview head-up 
display and evaluation of motion parallax smoothness," Proc. 
SPIE 8648, Stereoscopic Displays and Applications XXIV, 86481S 
Burlingame, California, United States (March 2013); https://doi.
org/10.1117/12.2006663.
[35]	 C. Yoon, K. Kim, H. S. Park, M. W. Park, S. K. Jung presented at 
17th Int. IEEE Conf. Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 
Qingdao, China, November 2014.
[36]	 A. W. D.  Bremers, A. Ö.  Yöntem, K.  Li, D.  Chu, V.  Meijering, 
C. P. Janssen, Perception of perspective in augmented reality head-
up displays, International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 2021, 
155, 102693.
[37]	 L. Pfannmüller, M. Walter, B. Senner, K. Bengler, Depth Perception 
of Augmented Reality Information in an Automotive Contact 
Analog Head-Up Display, Journal of Vision 2015, 15, 1078.
[38]	 M.  Götze, C.  Schweiger, J.  Eisner, K.  Bengler, presented at Proc. 
Human Factors Ergonomics Society Europe, Groningen, Nether-
lands. 2016.
[39]	 G.  Weinberg, B.  Harsham, Z.  Medenica, Evaluating the usability 
of a head-up display for selection from choice lists in cars. Auto-
motiveUI ‘11: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on 
Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications. 
November 2011. pp. 39–46.
[40]	 M. A. Gerber, R. Schroeter, L. Xiaomeng, M. Elhenawy presented 
at Proc. 2020 CHI Conf. Human Factors Computing Systems, 
Honolulu, HI, April 2020.
[41]	 P. Del Vo, M. Rizzi, S. Stibelli, in Holographic Head-Up Display For 
The Automotive Industry, 1989 International Congress on Optical 
Science and Engineering, Vol. Holographic Optics II: Principles and 
Applications, 1136, SPIE, Paris, France October 1989. https://doi.
org/10.1117/12.961681
[42]	 A.  Redert, R.  Berretty, C.  Varekamp, O.  Willemsen, J.  Swillens, 
H.  Driessen presented at Third Int. Symp. 3D Data Processing, 
Visualization, Transmission (3DPVT’06), Chapel Hill, NC, June 2006.
[43]	 R.  Häussler, Y.  Gritsai, E.  Zschau, R.  Missbach, H.  Sahm, 
M. Stock, H. Stolle, Appl. Opt. 2017, 56, F45.
[44]	 D.  Milne, VividQ: Indistinguishable from Reality: Overcoming Key 
Challenges in Highly Realistic Holographic Display for AR and 
Beyond, Proc. SPIE 11764, SPIE AVR21 Industry Talks II, 1176405, Vol. 
11764, SPIE, Bellingham, WA March 2021.
[45]	 R. N.  Anderton, P. R.  Coward a) US7443560B2, 2008;  
b) J. Christmas, N. Collings, Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 685; R. J. S. Miller, 
M. A. Gleeson c) US7009688, 2006.
[46]	 a) J. Christmas, M. Karner, US20200026077,  2020; b) J. Christmas, 
US20190383914,  2019; c) J. Christmas, US10061266,  2018.
[47]	 A. Cole, US20200103670,  2020.
[48]	 H.-B. Abel, H. Adamietz, B. Leuchtenberg, N. Schmidt, ATZ World-
wide 2005, 107, 13.
[49]	 W. Methe, F. Linke, P. Pogany, US9400386, 2016.
[50]	 B. Eberhardt, F.-P. Schmidt, US6809872,  2004.
[51]	 C. Fan, S. He, Microsyst. Technol. 2017, 23, 1671.
[52]	 T. Hirokawa, T. Yachida, US9753289,  2017.
[53]	 K.  Morohashi, M.  Sato, Y.  Takahashi, K.  Matsuura, US10302939, 
2019.
[54]	 S. Shikii, K. Sugiyama, S. Kadowaki, US8934159,  2015.
[55]	 a) B. G. Blundell, A. J. Schwarz, IEEE Trans. Visualization Comput. 
Graphics 2002, 8, 66; b) T. Okoshi, Three-Dimensional Imaging Tech-
niques, Atara Press, CA, USA 2012; c) S. A. Benton, V. M. BoveJr, 
Holographic Imaging, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, USA 2008; 
d) S.  Reichelt, R.  Haeussler, G.  Fütterer, N.  Leister, Proc. SPIE 
2010, 7690.
[56]	 D. Lanman, M. Hirsch, Y. Kim, R. Raskar, ACM SIGGRAPH Asia 
2010 papers (SIGGRAPH ASIA ‘10). Association for Computing 
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 163 2010, 29, 1.
[57]	 A. O.  Yontem, K.  Li, D. P.  Chu, V.  Meijering, L.  Skrypchuk, IEEE 
Veh. Technol. Mag. 2021, 16, 83.
[58]	 K. Park, Y. Im, Electronics 2020, 9, 611.
[59]	 A. Pauzie, presented at Int. Conf. Design, User Experience, Usability, 
Cham, Switzerland,  2015.
[60]	 V.  Charissis, S.  Papanastasiou, Human–machine collaboration 
through vehicle head up display interface, Cognition, Technology & 
Work 2010, 12, 41.
[61]	 T. W. Victor, J. L. Harbluk, J. A. Engstrom, Transp. Res. Part F: Traffic 
Psychol. Behav. 2005, 8, 167.
[62]	 C. T. Draper, C. M. Bigler, M. S. Mann, K. Sarma, P. A. Blanche, 
Appl. Opt. 2019, 58, A251.
[63]	 K.  Tangmanee, S.  Teeravarunyou, presented at 2012 Southeast 
Asian Network Ergonomics Societies Conf. (SEANES), Langkawi, 
Malaysia,  2012.
[64]	 a) R. L.  Austin, B. S.  Denning, B. C.  Drews, V. B.  Fedoriouk, 
R. C.  Calpito, J. Soc. Inf. Disp. 2018, 26, 567; b) S.  Martin, 
J. Thompson, I. Redmond, Inf. Disp. 2021, 37, 22.
[65]	 R. S. McCann, D. C. Foyle, J. C. Johnston, presented at Proc. Sev-
enth Int. Symp. Aviation Psychology, Columbus, OH,  1993.
[66]	 Y.-C.  Liu, Effects of using head-up display in automobile context 
on attention demand and driving performance, Displays 2003, 24, 
157.
[67]	 G.  Prabhakar, A.  Ramakrishnan, M.  Madan, L. R. D.  Murthy, 
V. K.  Sharma, S.  Deshmukh, P.  Biswas, J. Multimodal User Inter-
faces 2020, 14, 101.
[68]	 A. Sulyok, P. Koppa, presented at OSA Imaging Applied Optics Con-
gress 2021 (3D, COSI, DH, ISA, pcAOP), Washington, D.C., July  2021.
[69]	 S. Pankratz, W. Diepholz, J. VanDerlofske, Inf. Disp. 2021, 37, 30.
[70]	 J. L. Gabbard, M. Smith, K. Tanous, H. Kim, B. Jonas, Front. Rob. 
AI 2019, 6, 98.
[71]	 H. J. Oh, S. M. Ko, Y. G. Ji, Int. J. Hum.–Comput. Interact. 2016, 32, 
143.
[72]	 W. Wang, X. Zhu, K. Chan, P. Tsang, “Digital holographic system 
for automotive augmented reality head-up-display”, presented at 
IEEE 27th Int. Symp. Industrial Electronics (ISIE), Cairns, QLD, Aus-
tralia,  2018.
[73]	 V. Charissis, S. Papanastasiou, L. Mackenzie, S. Arafat, Evaluation 
of Collision Avoidance Prototype Head-Up Display Interface for Older 
Drivers, Chalmers Publication Library, Berlin July 2011.
[74]	 A. Bolton, G. Burnett, D. R. Large, in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. Automo-
tive User Interfaces Interactive Vehicular Applications, Association for 
Computing Machinery, Nottingham, UK 2015, p. 56.
[75]	 H. Peng, D. Cheng, J. Han, C. Xu, W. Song, L. Ha, J. Yang, Q. Hu, 
Y. Wang, Appl. Opt. 2014, 53, H177.
[76]	 H.  Okumura, T.  Sasaki, A.  Hotta, A.  Moriya, N.  Okada, 
O.  Nagahara, presented at 2011 IEEE Int. Conf. Consumer Elec-
tronics (ICCE), Las Vegas, NV, January  2011.
[77]	 C. T. Mu, W. T. Lin, C. H. Chen, Opt. Express 2020, 28, 35716.
[78]	 Y. Gao, Z. Chen, J. Ding, H. T. Wang, Appl. Opt. 2019, 58, 6591.
[79]	 P. W. Tsang, T. C. Poon, Opt. Express 2013, 21, 23680.

--- Page 24 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (24 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
[80]	 R. W. Gerchberg, Optik 1972, 35, 237.
[81]	 Y. Deng, D. Chu, Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 5893.
[82]	 J. S. Liu, M. R. Taghizadeh, Opt. Lett. 2002, 27, 1463.
[83]	 L. F. Vitushkin, O. A. Orlov, presented at Optical Measurement Sys-
tems for Industrial Inspection IV, Munich, Germany,  2005.
[84]	 G.  Chartier, Introduction to Optics, Springer Science & Business 
Media, Berlin 2005.
[85]	 H. H. Bauschke, P. L. Combettes, D. R. Luke, Phase retrieval, error 
reduction algorithm, and Fienup variants: a view from convex 
optimization, Journal of the Optical Society of America A 2002, 19, 
1334.
[86]	 H.  Bjelkhagen, D.  Brotherton-Ratcliffe, Ultra-Realistic Imaging: 
Advanced Techniques in Analogue and Digital Colour Holography, 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL 2013.
[87]	 R. L. Byer, Science 1988, 239, 742.
[88]	 N. Roeer, US20120181952,  2012.
[89]	 Y. H. Kwon, C. M. Jang, D. H. Shin, H. J. Seol, H. I. Kim, Lasers 
Med. Sci. 2008, 23, 407.
[90]	 K. T. Um, US7095761,  2006.
[91]	 J. H. Lee, I. Yanusik, Y. Choi, B. Kang, C. Hwang, J. Park, D. Nam, 
S. Hong, Opt. Express 2020, 28, 29788.
[92]	 D. F.  Albeanu, E.  Soucy, T. F.  Sato, M.  Meister, V. N.  Murthy, 
PLoS One 2008, 3, e2146.
[93]	 J. Sticklus, P. A. Hoeher, M. Hieronymi, Sensors 2020, 20, 5200.
[94]	 M. Pugh, G. Harbers, S. J. Bierhuizen, WO2007072353A1,  2009.
[95]	 C.  Dietlin, S.  Schweizer, P.  Xiao, J.  Zhang, F.  Morlet-Savary, 
B. Graff, J. P. Fouassier, J. Lalevee, Polym. Chem. 2015, 6, 3895.
[96]	 T.  Mukai, D.  Morita, S.  Nakamura, J. Cryst. Growth 1998, 189, 
778.
[97]	 E. M. Kercher, K. Zhang, M. Waguespack, R. T. Lang, A. Olmos, 
B. Q. Spring, J. Biomed. Opt. 2020, 25, 063811.
[98]	 a) J. E. Curtis, C. H. Schmitz, J. P. Spatz, Opt. Lett. 2005, 30, 2086; 
b) S. Matar, L. Golan, S. Shoham, Optics Express 2011, 19, 25891;  
c) L. Golan, S. Shoham, Opt. Express 2009, 17, 1330.
[99]	 Z. C. Zhang, Z. You, D. P. Chu, Light: Sci. Appl. 2014, 3, e213.
[100]	 a) H.  Huang, T.  Inoue, H.  Tanaka, Opt. Express 2011, 19, 15026;  
b) L. Onural, F. Yaraş, H. Kang, Proc. IEEE 2011, 99, 576.
[101]	 G.  Zheng, H.  Muhlenbernd, M.  Kenney, G.  Li, T.  Zentgraf, 
S. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10, 308.
[102]	 N. Dahan, Y. Gorodetski, K. Frischwasser, V. Kleiner, E. Hasman, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 105, 136402.
[103]	 L. Huang, X. Chen, H. Mühlenbernd, G. Li, B. Bai, Q. Tan, G. Jin, 
T. Zentgraf, S. Zhang, Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 5750.
[104]	 S.  Larouche, Y. J.  Tsai, T.  Tyler, N. M.  Jokerst, D. R.  Smith, Nat. 
Mater. 2012, 11, 450.
[105]	 H.-M. P. Chen, J.-P. Yang, H.-T. Yen, Z.-N. Hsu, Y. Huang, S.-T. Wu, 
Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 2323.
[106]	 J. E.  Curtis, B. A.  Koss, D. G.  Grier, Opt. Commun. 2002, 207, 
169.
[107]	 N. Kumar Nishchal, J. Joseph, K. Singh, Opt. Commun. 2004, 235, 
253.
[108]	 S. Kumar, H. Zhang, S. Maruca, Y. P. Huang, Opt. Lett. 2019, 44, 
98.
[109]	 S. Tam, Y. Chen, H. Zheng, W. Chen, presented at Microelectronic 
Packaging Laser Processing, Int. Symp. Microelectronics Assembly, 
Singapore,  1997.
[110]	 S.  Cho, C.  Hwang, J.  Choi, Y.  Kim, S.  Cheon, K.  Choi, J.  Kim, 
J. Yang, Electron. Telecommun. Trends May 2020, 35, 65.
[111]	 O. Sova, T. Galstian, Opt. Commun. 2020, 474, 126056.
[112]	 J.  Skirnewskaja, Y.  Montelongo, P.  Wilkes, T. D.  Wilkinson, Opt. 
Express 2021, 29, 13681.
[113]	 J. W.  Cooley, P. A. W.  Lewis, P. D.  Welch, Proc. IEEE 1967, 55, 
1675.
[114]	 J. S. Chen, D. P. Chu, Q. Smithwick, J. Electron. Imaging 2014, 23, 
023016.
[115]	 S. De Nicola, P. Ferraro, A. Finizio, G. Pierattini, Opt. Lett. 2001, 
26, 974.
[116]	 A. Gilles, P. Gioia, Appl. Opt. 2018, 57, 8508.
[117]	 a) E. A. Santos, F. Castro, R. Torres, Phys. Rev. A 2018, 97, 043853; 
b) M. Bayraktar, M. Ozcan, Appl. Opt. 2010, 49, 4647.
[118]	 A. Drezet, J. C. Woehl, S. Huant, J. Math. Phys. 2006, 47, 072901.
[119]	 J. W. Goodman, Introduction to Fourier Optics, Roberts & Company, 
Englewood, CO 2005.
[120]	 A. J. Macfaden, G. S. D. Gordon, T. D. Wilkinson, Sci. Rep. 2017, 
7, 13667.
[121]	 E. Hecht, Optics, Pearson, London, UK 2017.
[122]	 R. Kanwal, K. Liu, Int. J. Math. Educ. Sci. Technol 1989, 20, 411.
[123]	 R.  Ziegler, P.  Kaufmann, M.  Gross, IEEE Trans. Visualization 
Comput. Graphics 2007, 13, 403.
[124]	 H. Yoshikawa, Opt. Rev. 2001, 8, 331.
[125]	 P. Picart, P. Tankam, D. Mounier, Z. J. Peng, J. C. Li, Opt. Express 
2009, 17, 9145.
[126]	 K.  Stollberg, A.  Bruckner, J.  Duparre, P.  Dannberg, A.  Brauer, 
A. Tunnermann, Opt. Express 2009, 17, 15747.
[127]	 A.  Garza-Rivera, J. E.  Gomez-Correa, F. J.  Renero-Carrillo, 
J. P. Trevino, V. Coello, Chin. Opt. Lett. 2020, 18, 122201.
[128]	 H. G. Kim, Y. M. Ro, Opt. Express 2017, 25, 30418.
[129]	 C. Chen, B. Lee, N. N. Li, M. Chae, D. Wang, Q. H. Wang, B. Lee, 
Opt. Express 2021, 29, 15089.
[130]	 J.  Lee, J.  Jeong, J.  Cho, D.  Yoo, B.  Lee, presented at 3D Image 
Acquisition Display: Technology, Perception Applications 2020, Wash-
ington, D.C., 2020.
[131]	 B. J. Jackin, T. Yatagai, Appl. Opt. 2011, 50, H147.
[132]	 T. Shimobaba, H. Nakayama, N. Masuda, T. Ito, Opt. Express 2010, 
18, 19504.
[133]	 P. W. M. Tsang, T. Poon, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 2016, 12, 886.
[134]	 L. B. Lesem, P. M. Hirsch, J. A. Jordan, IBM J. Res. Dev. 1969, 13, 150.
[135]	 C.-Y.  Chen, W.-C.  Li, H.-T.  Chang, C.-H.  Chuang, T.-J.  Chang, 
J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 2017, 34, B42.
[136]	 J. Jia, J. Liu, G. Jin, Y. Wang, Appl. Opt. 2014, 53, 6287.
[137]	 a) J. Weng, T. Shimobaba, N. Okada, H. Nakayama, M. Oikawa, 
N.  Masuda, T.  Ito, Opt. Express 2012, 20, 4018; b) D.  Arai, 
T.  Shimobaba, K.  Murano, Y.  Endo, R.  Hirayama, D.  Hiyama, 
T.  Kakue, T.  Ito, Opt. Express 2015, 23, 1740; c) H.  Nishi, 
K. Matsushima, S. Nakahara, Appl. Opt. 2011, 50, H245.
[138]	 a) Y.  Takaki, K.  Ikeda, Opt. Express 2013, 21, 9652; b) B.  Katz, 
N. T. Shaked, J. Rosen, Opt. Express 2007, 15, 13250.
[139]	 K. Matsushima, S. Nakahara, Appl. Opt. 2009, 48, H54.
[140]	 Z. Han, B. Yan, Y. Qi, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, Appl. Opt. 2019, 58, 69.
[141]	 C. M. Nguyen, D. Muhammad, H.-S. Kwon, Appl. Opt. 2018, 57, 1504.
[142]	 S. Xue, S. Y. Chen, G. P. Tie, Y. Tian, Opt. Express 2019, 27, 8414.
[143]	 M.  Makowski, I.  Ducin, K.  Kakarenko, J.  Suszek, A.  Kowalczyk, 
Photonics Lett. Pol. 2016, 8, 26.
[144]	 P. S. Chiu, C. H. Chen, W. W. C. Chiang, presented at SID Symp. 
Digest Technical Papers, Proc.: EuroDisplay 2015,  2015.
[145]	 P.  Chakravarthula, E.  Tseng, T.  Srivastava, H.  Fuchs, F.  Heide, 
ACM Trans. Graphics 2020, 39, 186.
[146]	 E. J. Candes, X. Li, M. Soltanolkotabi, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 2015, 
61, 1985.
[147]	 Y.  Pan, X.  Xu, S.  Solanki, X.  Liang, R. B.  Tanjung, C.  Tan, 
T. C. Chong, Opt. Express 2009, 17, 18543.
[148]	 S. C. Kim, J. H. Yoon, E. S. Kim, Appl. Opt. 2008, 47, 5986.
[149]	 Y.  Ichihashi, H.  Nakayama, T.  Ito, N.  Masuda, T.  Shimobaba, 
A. Shiraki, T. Sugie, Opt. Express 2009, 17, 13895.
[150]	 P.  Chakravarthula, Y.  Peng, J.  Kollin, H.  Fuchs, F.  Heide, 
ACM Trans. Graph. 2019, 38, 213.
[151]	 M. Özcan, M. Bayraktar, Digital Holography Image Reconstruction 
Methods, Vol. 7233, SPIE, Bellingham, WA 2009.
[152]	 a) D. G. Grier, Nature 2003, 424, 810; b) T. Haist, M. Schonleber, 
H. J. Tiziani, Opt. Commun. 1997, 140, 299.

--- Page 25 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (25 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
[153]	 a) G.  Sinclair, J.  Leach, P.  Jordan, G.  Gibson, E.  Yao, Z.  Laczik, 
M. Padgett, J. Courtial, Opt. Express 2004, 12, 1665; b) M. Meister, 
R. J. Winfield, Opt. Commun. 2002, 203, 39.
[154]	 I. Reutsky-Gefen, L. Golan, N. Farah, A. Schejter, L. Tsur, I. Brosh, 
S. Shoham, Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 1509.
[155]	 C.  Chang, J.  Xia, J.  Wu, W.  Lei, Y.  Xie, M.  Kang, Q.  Zhang, 
Opt. Express 2014, 22, 17331.
[156]	 Z. Zalevsky, D. Mendlovic, R. G. Dorsch, Opt. Lett. 1996, 21, 842.
[157]	 E. O.  Brigham, The Fast Fourier Transform and Its Applications, 
Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ 1988.
[158]	 P. Zhou, Y. Bi, M. Sun, H. Wang, F. Li, Y. Qi, Appl. Opt. 2014, 53, 
G209.
[159]	 S. G. Johnson, M. Frigo, IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 2006, 55, 111.
[160]	 J. S. Chen, D. P. Chu, Opt. Express 2015, 23, 18143.
[161]	 H. E.  Hwang, H. T.  Chang, W. N.  Lie, Opt. Express 2009, 17, 
13700.
[162]	 J. A. Davis, I. Moreno, D. M. Cottrell, C. A. Berg, C. L. Freeman, 
A. Carmona, W. Debenham, Opt. Eng. 2015, 54, 103101.
[163]	 Y. Zhao, L. Cao, H. Zhang, D. Kong, G. Jin, Opt. Express 2015, 23, 
25440.
[164]	 C. Chang, Y. Qi, J. Wu, J. Xia, S. Nie, Opt. Express 2017, 25, 6568.
[165]	 A. Maimone, A. Georgiou, J. S. Kollin, ACM Trans. Graphics 2017, 
36, 85.
[166]	 X. Li, J. Liu, J. Jia, Y. Pan, Y. Wang, Opt. Express 2013, 21, 20577.
[167]	 P. C. Barnum, S. G. Narasimhan, T. Kanade, ACM Trans. Graphics 
2010, 29, 76.
[168]	 Y. Nakamura, P. B. Lim, T. Goto, H. Uchida, M. Inoue, Opt. Express 
2019, 27, 27573.
[169]	 O. Hernandez, E. Papagiakoumou, D. Tanese, K. Fidelin, C. Wyart, 
V. Emiliani, Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 11928.
[170]	 H. Zhang, Y. Zhao, L. Cao, G. Jin, Appl. Opt. 2016, 55, A154.
[171]	 Y.  Peng, S.  Choi, N.  Padmanaban, G.  Wetzstein, ACM Trans. 
Graphics 2020, 39, 185.
[172]	 T. Shimobaba, T. Ito, Opt. Express 2015, 23, 9549.
[173]	 M. Ichikawa, S. Saida, A. Osa, K. Munechika, Vision Res. 2003, 43, 
2439.
[174]	 P.  Mordohai, G.  Medioni, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 
2006, 28, 968.
[175]	 H. Zhang, Y. Zhao, L. Cao, G. Jin, Opt. Express 2015, 23, 3901.
[176]	 T. Kozacki, J. Martinez-Carranza, R. Kukołowicz, M. Chlipała, Opt. 
Express 2021, 29, 18173.
[177]	 L.-P. Morency, A. Rahimi, N. Checka, T. Darrell, in Proc. Fifth IEEE 
Int. Conf. Automatic Face Gesture Recognition, IEEE Computer 
Society, Washington, DC 2002, p. 390.
[178]	 N. Leister, A. Schwerdtner, G. Fütterer, S. Buschbeck, J.-C. Olaya, 
S. Flon, Full-Color Interactive Holographic Projection System for Large 
3D Scene Reconstruction, Vol. 6911, SPIE, Bellingham, WA 2008.
[179]	 H. Yu, K. Lee, J. Park, Y. Park, Nat. Photonics 2017, 11, 186.
[180]	 K. Matsushima, T. Shimobaba, Opt. Express 2009, 17, 19662.
[181]	 J.  Hahn, H.  Kim, Y.  Lim, G.  Park, B.  Lee, Opt. Express 2008, 16, 
12372.
[182]	 L. Z. Liu, K. O’Keeffe, D. T. Lloyd, S. M. Hooker, Opt. Lett. 2014, 
39, 2137.
[183]	 Y. Gao, Z. Tan, X. Chen, G. Chen, IEEE Photonics J. 2020, 12, 1.
[184]	 J. Zhang, N. Pégard, J. Zhong, H. Adesnik, L. Waller, Optica 2017, 
4, 1306.
[185]	 A. Gilles, P. Gioia, R. Cozot, L. Morin, presented at IEEE Int. Conf. 
Multimedia Expo Workshops (ICMEW), Seattle, WA, July 2016.
[186]	 M. Pasienski, B. Demarco, Opt. Express 2008, 16, 2176.
[187]	 D. Y. Alsaka, C. Arpali, S. A. Arpali, Opt. Rev. 2018, 25, 625.
[188]	 a) T.  Yatagai, Appl. Opt. 1976, 15, 2722; b) K.  Wakunami, 
M. Yamaguchi, Opt. Express 2011, 19, 9086.
[189]	 L. Zhu, J. Wang, Sci. Rep. 2014, 4, 7441.
[190]	 H. Zhang, L. Cao, G. Jin, Opt. Express 2019, 27, 11689.
[191]	 O. Ripoll, V. Kettunen, H. P. Herzig, Opt. Eng. 2004, 43, 2549.
[192]	 a) Z. Z. Yuan, S. H. Tao, J. Opt. 2014, 16, 105701; b) A. Jesacher, 
C.  Maurer, A.  Schwaighofer, S.  Bernet, M.  Ritsch-Marte, Opt. 
Express 2008, 16, 2597.
[193]	 H. Zhou, Y. Wang, X. Li, Z. Xu, X. Li, L. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2021, 119, 044104.
[194]	 T.  Kakue, T.  Nishitsuji, T.  Kawashima, K.  Suzuki, T.  Shimobaba, 
T. Ito, Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 11750.
[195]	 R.  Lagoo, V.  Charissis, W.  Chan, S.  Khan, D. K.  Harrison, pre-
sented at ICCE, Las Vegas, NV,  2018.
[196]	 S. H. Lee, S. O. Yoon, J. Comput. Des. Eng. 2020, 7, 700.
[197]	 Y. Jia, E. Shelhamer, J. Donahue, S. Karayev, J. Long, R. Girshick, 
S. Guadarrama, T. Darrell, presented at Proc. 22nd ACM Int. Conf. 
Multimedia, Orlando, FL,  2014.
[198]	 M. Rezaei, M. Terauchi, R. Klette, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 
2015, 16, 2723.
[199]	 H. Kim, A. M. Anon, T. Misu, N. Li, A. Tawari, K. Fujimura, pre-
sented at Proc. 21st Int. Conf. Intelligent User Interfaces, Sonoma, 
CA, May 2016.
[200]	 H. Kim, J. L. Gabbard, A. M. Anon, T. Misu, IEEE Trans. Visualiza-
tion Comput. Graphics 2018, 24, 1515.
[201]	 J. M. Davila Delgado, L. Oyedele, P. Demian, T. Beach, Adv. Eng. 
Inf. 2020, 45, 101122.
[202]	 T.  Ichikawa, K.  Yamaguchi, Y.  Sakamoto, Appl. Opt. 2013, 52, 
A201.
[203]	 G. Bara, P. Bara, J. Castanon, M. Barbosa, in Advances in Usability, 
User Experience and Assistive Technology, Advances in Intelligent Sys-
tems and Computing, Vol. 794, Springer, Cham, Switzerland 2019, 
p. 184.
[204]	 F. Yaras, H. Kang, L. Onural, Opt. Express 2011, 19, 9147.
[205]	 T. Kozacki, Appl. Opt. 2011, 50, 3579.
[206]	 S. Yoshida, Opt. Express 2016, 24, 13194.
[207]	 G. Favalora, Computer 2005, 38, 37.
[208]	 N.  Tsutsumi, K.  Kinashi, K.  Tada, K.  Fukuzawa, Y.  Kawabe, 
Opt. Express 2013, 21, 19880.
[209]	 H. Kim, J. Hahn, B. Lee, Appl. Opt. 2008, 47, D117.
[210]	 J.  Su, X. P.  Yan, Y. Q.  Huang, X. Y.  Jiang, Y. B.  Chen, T.  Zhang, 
Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 851.
[211]	 I. Rincon, V. Arrizon, OSA Continuum 2019, 2, 2983.
[212]	 T. Yendo, T. Fujii, M. Tanimoto, M. P. Tehrani, J. Visual Commun. 
Image Represent. 2010, 21, 586.
[213]	 X.  Xia, X.  Liu, H.  Li, Z.  Zheng, H.  Wang, Y.  Peng, W.  Shen, 
Opt. Express 2013, 21, 11237.
[214]	 Y. Lim, K. Hong, H. Kim, H. E. Kim, E. Y. Chang, S. Lee, T. Kim, 
J.  Nam, H. G.  Choo, J.  Kim, J.  Hahn, Opt. Express 2016, 24, 
24999.
[215]	 B.  Liu, X.  Sang, X.  Yu, L.  Li, L.  Yang, B.  Yan, K.  Wang, C.  Yu, 
presented at Optical Storage Display Technology, Applied Optics 
Photonics China (AOPC), Beijing, China,  2017.
[216]	 Y. Takaki, N. Nago, Opt. Express 2010, 18, 8824.
[217]	 W. Wan, W. Qiao, D. Pu, R. Li, C. Wang, Y. Hu, H. Duan, L. J. Guo, 
L. Chen, iScience 2020, 23, 100773.
[218]	 H. Ren, X. Fang, J. Jang, J. Burger, J. Rho, S. A. Maier, Nat. Nano-
technol. 2020, 15, 948.
[219]	 a) R.  Häussler, A.  Schwerdtner, N.  Leister, presented at 
Stereoscopic Displays Applications XIX, Electronic Imaging, San Jose, 
CA,  2008; b) K. Sato, A. Sugita, M. Morimoto, K. Fujii, presented 
at Practical Holography XX: Materials Applications, Integrated 
Optoelectronic Devices, San Jose, CA,  2006; c) G. L.  Chen, 
C. Y. Lin, M. K. Kuo, C. C. Chang, Opt. Express 2007, 15, 8851.
[220]	 T. Kreis, P. Aswendt, R. Hofling, Opt. Eng. 2001, 40, 926.
[221]	 D. E. Smalley, Q. Y. Smithwick, V. M. Bove, Jr., J. Barabas, S. Jolly, 
Nature 2013, 498, 313.
[222]	 A. M.  Matteo, C. S.  Tsai, N.  Do, Collinear guided wave to 
leaky wave acoustooptic interactions in proton-exchanged 
LiNbO/sub 3/ waveguides, IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, 

--- Page 26 ---
www.advmat.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2110463  (26 of 26)
© 2022 The Authors. Advanced Materials published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
Jana Skirnewskaja is a member of the Foundation of German Business Fellow and EPSRC 
Doctoral Fellow in the Department of Engineering at the University of Cambridge. She has 
a M.Res. degree in Electrical Engineering from the UCL and a M.Sc. degree in Mechanical 
Engineering from the University of Birmingham. She researches holographic automotive head-up 
displays to project 3D UHD images using LiDAR data in vehicles.
Timothy D. Wilkinson received his undergraduate degree from the Canterbury University, New 
Zealand, and his Ph.D. from the University of Cambridge. He is currently a Professor of Photonic 
Engineering at the University of Cambridge, and a Fellow of Jesus College. He researches holo-
graphic technology, photonics, devices, and optical systems.
Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control 2000, 47, 16; b) U.  Rust, 
E.  Strake presented at Integrated Photonics Research, New 
Orleans, LA, April 1992.
[223]	 F. Yaras, H. Kang, L. Onural, J. Disp. Technol. 2010, 6, 443.
[224]	 L. Shi, F.-C. Huang, W. Lopes, W. Matusik, D. Luebke, ACM Trans. 
Graphics 2017, 36, 236.
[225]	 H. Gao, Y. Wang, X. Fan, B. Jiao, T. Li, C. Shang, C. Zeng, L. Deng, 
W. Xiong, J. Xia, M. Hong, Sci. Adv. 2020, 6, eaba8595.
[226]	 L. Shi, B. Li, C. Kim, P. Kellnhofer, W. Matusik, Nature 2021, 591, 
234.
[227]	 K. Wakunami, P.-Y. Hsieh, R. Oi, T. Senoh, H. Sasaki, Y. Ichihashi, 
M. Okui, Y.-P. Huang, K. Yamamoto, Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 12954.
[228]	 A. V. Zea, J. F. B. Ramírez, R. Torroba, Opt. Lasers Eng. 2019, 122, 239.
[229]	 M.  Chlipała, T.  Kozacki, H.-J.  Yeom, J.  Martinez-Carranza, 
R. Kukołowicz, J. Kim, J.-H. Yang, J. H. Choi, J.-E. Pi, C.-S. Hwang, 
Opt. Lett. 2021, 46, 4956.
[230]	 J. L. Gabbard, G. M. Fitch, H. Kim, Proc. IEEE 2014, 102, 124.
[231]	 R. Häuslschmid, D. Ren, F. Alt, A. Butz, T. Höllerer, Personalizing 
Content Presentation on Large 3D Head-Up Displays, PRESENCE: 
Virtual and Augmented Reality 2019, 27, 80.
[232]	 S. M.  LaValle, Planning Algorithms, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge 2006.
[233]	 H. Ren, S. A. Maier, presented at Digital Holography Three-Dimen-
sional Imaging, Washington, D.C.,  2021.
[234]	 D. K. Shah, J. Ascenso, C. Brites, F. Pereira, presented at 3DTV-
Conf.: True Vision – Capture, Transmission Display 3D Video 
(3DTV-CON), Zurich, Switzerland,  2012.
[235]	 P.-J. Wu, C.-H. Chuang, C.-Y. Chen, J.-H. Wu, B.-S. Lin, Int. J. Opt. 
2020, 2020, 4719268.
[236]	 T. Zhan, J. Xiong, G. Tan, S.-T. Wu presented at SID Symp. Digest 
Technical Papers, 2020.
[237]	 T.  Nishitsuji, D.  Blinder, T.  Kakue, T.  Shimobaba, P.  Schelkens, 
T. Ito, Opt. Express 2021, 29, 12849.
[238]	 M. Tran, C. Draeger, Environ. Plan B Urban Anal. City Sci. 2021, 48, 
2726; b) H. Detjen, S. Geisler, S. Schneegass, A. L. Kun, V. Sundar, 
presented at 13th Int. Conf. Automotive User Interfaces Interactive 
Vehicular Applications, New York, NY, 2021. pp.194-196
[239]	 Y.  Wang, J.  Chai, T.  Lei, Chinese UMUX: Cross-Cultural Adapta-
tion for Perceived Usability Measurement, International Journal of 
Human–Computer Interaction 2021, 37, 1538; V. Charissis, J. Falah, 
R. Lagoo, S. F. M. Alfalah, S. Khan, S. Wang, S. Altarteer, K. Larbi, 
D.  Drikakis, Employing Emerging Technologies to Develop and 
Evaluate In-Vehicle Intelligent Systems for Driver Support: Info-
tainment AR HUD Case Study, Applied Sciences 2021, 11, 1397; 
K. Park, S. H. Han, J. Kwahk, Toward Trustworthy and Comfortable 
Lane Keeping Assistance System: An Empirical Study of the Level 
of Haptic Authority, International Journal of Human–Computer 
Interaction 2021, 37, 1347.
Adv. Mater. 2022, 2110463
