Interface Design of Automobile Head-up Display from 
the Perspective of Human-Machine Interaction 

Lening Guan* 

1756087502@qq.com 

Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, 210094, China 

Abstract: Under the background of user-centered era, the traditional head-down display 
(HDD)  is  gradually  being  replaced  by  head-up  display  (HUD).  As  the  carrier  of  HUD 
information  presentation  and  the  medium  for  direct  interaction  with  drivers,  the  design 
research  of  HUD  interface  has  become  increasingly  important  and  necessary  in  the 
research  of  automobile  display  system.  From  the  perspective  of  human-computer 
interaction,  this  paper  searches  and  summarizes  relevant  literature,  and  analyzes  the 
research of HUD interface in three levels of information content, information level and 
information style related to user visual cognition, as well as the research of HUD interface 
in  adapting  to  the  physiological  and  psychological  cognitive  characteristics  of  different 
people, specific scenarios and other interaction elements. Finally，this paper concludes 
the  process  and  common  research  methods  of  HUD  interface  design  and  prospects  the 
future research direction. 

Keywords: head-up display, interface design, human-computer interaction 

1 Introduction 

Head-up display, or HUD, is a display technology that uses the principle of optical reflection to 
map important information directly in front of the driver's field of vision. HUD can effectively 
reduce the driver's head down frequency and reduce the time of eye focus, so as to improve the 
driver's  information  acquisition  efficiency,  reduce  cognitive  load  and  ensure  driving  safety. 
With  the  development  of  new  technologies  such  as  automobile  networking,  artificial 
intelligence,  and  cloud  computing,  the  human-computer  interaction  mode  of  traditional 
automotive  interiors  has  undergone  major  changes.  A  large  number  of  entertainment, 
communication, navigation and other information began to pour into the interior space of the 
car from external devices, and the information dimension of the car also became complicated, 
which  made  the  car  need  more  display  devices  to  present  information.  HUD  is  one  of  the 
information  carriers  closely  related  to  driving  behaviour,  and  its  huge  market  potential  and 
optimistic application prospect have prompted many scholars to carry out multi-field and multi-
dimensional  professional  research  and  technology  upgrade.  From  the  human-machine 
perspective, this paper summarizes and discusses the human-machine interaction interface of 
automobile  HUD,  summarizes  its  design  process  and  common  research  methods,  and  puts 
forward  the  prospect  of  future  research  direction,  providing  a  guide  for  the  future  design  of 
HUD.  

ADDT 2024, May 24-26, Luoyang, People's Republic of China
Copyright © 2024 EAI
DOI 10.4108/eai.24-5-2024.2350098

2 Automobile HUD interface information design 

HUD display interface information is increasingly rich, if the complex information is arranged 
on the HUD human-machine interface without rules, the interface will be easy to cause problems 
such  as  unclear  presentation,  unclear  level,  so  that  the  driver  cannot  efficiently  obtain  key 
information, and thus affect the driving safety. Therefore, the design arrangement of human-
machine  interface  information  and  the  visual  effect  and  cognitive  feeling  brought  by  the 
interface  information  to  the  driver  are  the  key  factors  affecting  the  interface  design  effect. 
Current research on information design of automobile head-up display interface can be divided 
into three categories: information content, information level and information form.  

2.1 Information content 

In  the  intelligent  era,  the  information  content  of  the  in-car  interface  is  no  longer  limited  to 
traditional driving information such as speed, rotational speed, gear, etc., even abandoned fuel 
automobile  information  such  as  fuel  reminder  and  fuel  consumption,  and  then  expanded 
intelligent auxiliary information such as entertainment, communication, ADAS，and so on. In 
this  context,  the  research  on  the  information  content  of  the  automobile  HUD  interface  has 
become the basis for organizing information architecture and arranging information forms. This 
paper  divides  the  existing  on-board  HUD  interface  information  into  four  categories:  basic 
driving information, navigation information, safety assistance information, and entertainment 
information. Each category of information contains several information modules (Table 1). 

Table 1. Summary of automobile HUD interface information.  

Information Classification 

Basic automobile information 

Navigation information 

Safety assistance information 

Entertainment information 

energy 

information, 

information, 

temperature,  battery  status, 

Information Content 
Speed information, gear information, rotational 
speed information, fuel/power, headlight status, 
steering 
recovery 
tire  pressure,  mileage, 
information,  range, 
water/oil 
time 
information 
Distance  sign,  destination  information,  current 
time 
lane,  fork  choice, 
turn 
lane  change 
indication, 
indication,  U-turn 
reminder, current road speed limit, special road 
conditions,  congestion  level,  special  location 
indication 
ADAS  Advanced  driver  assistance  system 
information  (ACC,  AEB,  BSD,  FCW,  LDW, 
ISA,  PDS,  NVS,  AFL,  TSR,  etc.),  signage 
reminders,  door  status,  seat  belt  information, 
collision safety warning, outdoor temperature 
Music information, radio information, bluetooth 
speech 
communication  messages, 
status, 
recognition, gesture recognition 

 
 
 
 
2.2 Information hierarchy 

The interface information of the automobile HUD is rich and huge, so it needs to be divided into 
clear and logical information levels, so that the driver can easily, timely and accurately obtain 
key information. The construction of clear information hierarchy is a key element to improve 
the usability of HUD interfaces, and is also an important part of constituting excellent human-
computer interaction. Beck invited subjects with HUD experience to evaluate the importance of 
common information elements subjectively, and came up with level 1 information, namely four 
universal characteristics of important information: the need for frequent or continuous attention, 
the need for rapid perception and response, the need for correct information processing, and the 
failure to obtain it from the external environment [1]. 

Since there are differences among people, scenes and targets using HUD, the research on the 
interface  information  level  should  be  based  on  these  differences  to  effectively  improve  the 
interactive  pain  points  under  the  target  scene.  Li  Built  a  hierarchical  HUD  security  prompt 
information  model  based  on  the  element  of  security  auxiliary  information,  determined  the 
information  weight  accordingly,  and  completed  the  information  organization  and  system 
interaction adaptive strategy of HUD [2]. Zeng Proposed the information organization strategy 
division  based  on  four  functional  elements  of  navigation  information:  direction  guidance, 
distance reminder, place name reminder and driving assistance [3]. 

2.3 Information form 

The  form  of  interface  information  includes  the  color,  size,  position,  transparency  and  other 
visual information of interface elements, which is the core factor affecting the visual effect of 
interface. Due to the rich visual characteristics of human beings, such as the sensitivity of human 
eyes to different colors of light, the spatial resolution and grey resolution range of human eyes, 
visual  adaptation,  visual  inertia,  visual  illusion,  etc.,  the  information  form  of  HUD  interface 
needs to make reasonable use of many visual characteristics, and make reasonable design and 
arrangement of information elements to meet the visual cognitive laws of most people. 

Wang  studied  the  impact  of  static  and  dynamic  indication  information  in  AR-HUD  on  the 
driver's  situational  awareness,  and  the  results  showed  that  static  information  improved  the 
driver's  ability  to  predict  the  environment,  while  dynamic  information  enhanced  the  driver's 
ability to perceive the environment [4]. Kandil studied the impact of AR-HUD interface design 
based  on  the  external  environment  and  the  former  windshield  on  the  driver's  environmental 
cognition, and clarified that the more concise and fixed screen carrier interface information has 
a more positive impact on the driver's environmental cognition than the more novel and dynamic 
environmental carrier interface information [5]. 

Research on HUD information color is the most abundant. Liu studied the color coding method 
of automobile HUD from the perspective of color adaptation, extracted HSV color values in 
different environments and matched them with HUD color values in corresponding scenes, so 
that HUD interface information could be most prominent under different environmental light 
colors,  and  ensured  the  driver's  cognition  and  recognition  efficiency  [6].  Gabbard  studied  a 
perceptual  matching  method  to  check  color  mixing  in  HUD  graphics,  and  verified  the  high 
performance of visual search tasks under blue, green, and yellow graphics [7]. Guan conducted 
a study on color classification strategy and ergonomic evaluation of HUD, and concluded that 
HUD interface with red background color and yellow and green foreground color has the highest 

 
 
 
 
search  performance,  and  information  with  higher  priority  can  be  set  to  green  and  other 
information can be set to yellow during interface design [8]. 

3 Research on human-computer interaction of HUD interface  

Human-computer interaction is the process of information exchange between the machine and 
the user in a certain interactive way to complete the determined task. The interface is the direct 
medium and dialogue interface for the two sides to transmit and exchange information, and is 
an  important  part  of  the  interaction  system.  Therefore,  the  interaction  research  on  the  HUD 
interface  is  an  indispensable  part  of  the  automobile  HUD  design  research.  The  interface 
information mentioned above is the communication form and visual presentation carrier of the 
interface interaction system. However, in addition to the links visible to the user, an excellent 
interaction  system  should  also  consider  the  user's  understanding  of  the  machine,  the  user's 
behaviour characteristics, the availability of the machine, the interaction environment based on 
time and space, and other interaction elements and the underlying interaction logic that can build 
a complete interaction order. This paper summarizes the specific interaction flow between the 
user  and  the  automobile  HUD  interface  (Figure  1)  and  divides  the  existing  HUD  interface 
interaction research into the interaction research based on specific population, the interaction 
research  based  on  specific  space-time  scene  and  the  interaction  research  based  on  other 
interaction elements. 

Fig. 1. Interaction flow between the user and the HUD interface.  

3.1 Interactive studies based on specific populations 

Different people have different body size parameters and physiological abilities, and also have 
different mental models. Due to the visual interaction between automobile HUD and drivers, 
drivers  of  different  ages,  driving  ages  and  genders  have  certain  differences  in  visual 
performance such as information visual needs, attention allocation and distraction risk, which 

 
 
 
 
 
are  further  related  to  drivers'  behavioural  performance  such  as  reaction  and  decision  time, 
automobile handling and information perception. This requires that the HUD interface should 
take  into  account  the  behavioural  and  cognitive  differences  between  different  users  at  the 
beginning of the design, so as to achieve inclusive design. 

Zhang compared the HUD information needs of beginners and experienced drivers in different 
road environments, and concluded that beginners have different information needs for different 
road conditions, while experienced drivers have fixed information needs, both of which have 
higher  requirements  for  navigation  information  [9].  Aydogdu  applied  HUD  in  the  driving 
process of different groups to explore the changes in their driving ability, and the results show 
that HUD has a significant impact on driving ability, security and driving experience, and this 
impact is more intense in elderly drivers, students and women. When HUD is activated, women 
will feel safer [10]. 

3.2 Interaction research based on specific scenarios 

The driving task takes place in a certain scene and has the dual properties of space transfer and 
time deduction. In a specific scenario, driving behaviour also has the dual availability attributes 
of  scenario-driven  and  scenario-served.  Based  on  scene  recognition  and  scene  ecology,  the 
development of specific HUD interaction strategies for specific driving tasks is conducive to 
users' efficient completion of driving tasks. Charissis studied the spatial awareness and reaction 
time of drivers in low-visibility environment, and designed the HUD interface prototype [11]. 
In order to understand the speed impact of AR-HUD cues on drivers' recognition of pedestrians 
and the acceptability of visual cues for automatic intervention, Karatas developed an AR-HUD 
based on pedestrian reminder scenes, and proved its effectiveness for drivers' rapid recognition 
of potential dangers in the evaluation results [12]. Du focused on unmanned taxi, based on the 
explicit interaction theory, deeply explored the common scenes of users in taxis and the reasons 
for the demand for explicit information, and produced the design practice scheme applied to 
unmanned  taxi,  providing  reference  value  for  the  design  of  unmanned  taxi  human-machine 
interaction interface [13]. 

3.3 Interaction research based on other interaction elements 

Although  specific  people  show  different  interaction  characteristics  in  specific  scenarios,  the 
cognitive  characteristics  and  interaction  mechanism  behind  it  are  still  worth  exploring. 
Therefore, many scholars build HUD design framework based on user's cognitive rule and user's 
underlying logic drive. Nayara observed "unconscious blindness" during driving, in which the 
visual information presented by the AR HUD may be ignored if the driver's attention is focused 
on another activity other than the driving task. Based on this phenomenon, the authors evaluated 
the driver's eye distribution and visual ability, and designed an interactive interface to eliminate 
perceptual faults [14]. Kim noticed that HUD interface might cause cognitive damage to drivers' 
perception  of  road  surface  information.  By  treating  different  types  of  objects  on  the  road  as 
independent dynamic AOI, they summarized information elements that might cause cognitive 
damage and provided suggestions for the design of HUD information interface [15]. 

The  human-computer  interaction  discussed  above  mostly  stays  at  the  visual  level.  However, 
multi-sensory and multi-channel interaction can achieve multi-device collaboration and cross-
device  scene  migration  by  means  of  its  diversity,  accuracy  and  inclusiveness  in  the  face  of 

 
 
 
 
different  groups  of  people,  occupying  a  place  in  the  field  of  interaction.  Wang  introduced  a 
seamless multi-sensory interaction design space and applied it to automotive HMI through the 
integrated view of temporal cognitive dimension and space, and provided a design case study 
to  explain  its  practical  value  [16].  In  addition,  some  scholars  grasp  the  key  steps  in  the 
interaction process, starting from the interaction node, to optimize the design of HUD interactive 
interface. For example, Han starting from the key node of human operation to machine takeover, 
studied the technical principle and system framework of AR-HUD takeover mode, designed the 
interactive  interface,  and  demonstrated  the  feasibility  of  the  interactive  interface  from  two 
aspects: emergency takeover and ordinary takeover [17] 

4 Design process and common research methods of HUD interface 

Based on the existing research results, this paper summarizes the design process of automobile 
HUD  interface  into  three  stages:  demand  research  stage,  design  stage  and  evaluation  stage 
(Figure 2). 

Fig. 2. HUD interface design flow. 

The demand research stage can be divided into user research and market research. According to 
the positioning of the design object, researchers should have insight into the market demand, 
analyze the existing emerging technologies and application fields, investigate and understand 
the industry situation, determine the market positioning of the product, and strive for technical 
advantages. Common market research methods include field trials, social media listening, desk 
research, etc. At the same time, researchers should interview and communicate with target users, 
listen  to  their  needs  and  motivations,  understand  their  behavior  patterns  and  psychological 
activities, so as to quickly build user portraits and master product pain points. Commonly used 

 
 
 
 
 
demand research methods include card classification, questionnaire survey, IPA model, etc. The 
requirements selection process should be as comprehensive and precise as possible in order to 
guide the next design work. 

The  interface  design  stage  can  be  divided  into  two  steps:  information  clustering  and  design 
practice.  The  designer  first  needs  to  cluster  the  collected  research  information  and  grade  it 
according to its importance, which lays a foundation for the subsequent selection of interface 
information content, division of levels and design of forms. Common information clustering 
methods can be realized by cluster analysis and qualitative analysis software such as EZ-sort 
and Nvivo, or by user emotional evaluation and user collaboration. Secondly, the designer needs 
to process the key information elements of the interface in a form that conforms to aesthetic 
experience according to the user cognitive law, and complete the design of the HUD interface. 
This article provides seven general design principles for the design of  HUD for reference: 

(1)  Information  priorities  need  to  be  ranked  according  to  importance,  important  information 
should be fully displayed and in a prominent position. And information about driving safety 
must be the highest priority. 

(2) The information content is best not to be static, and dynamic information is not easy to make 
the driver feel sleepy and tired. Urgent information needs to be displayed in an eye-catching and 
dynamic manner. 

(3) The display color of the HUD should be a high-saturation color, and the high-saturation blue, 
green and yellow will help the driver to extract information. 

(4)  The  display  color  and  brightness  of  the  HUD  should  take  into  account  changes  in  the 
background and lighting, and it is best to make adaptive changes according to the environment 
in order to present a high contrast state with the surrounding environment. At the same time, be 
careful to prevent HUD information from blocking road information. 

(5)  HUD  information  should  not  only  have  visual  stimuli,  it  is  best  to  combine  with  other 
sensory stimuli such as hearing or smell to achieve multi-modal interaction. 

(6)  HUD  should  be  able  to  record  the  presets  of  multiple  different  drivers,  so  that  different 
drivers  can  quickly  set  preferences  when  using  it.  The  default  content  includes  the  physical 
position of the HUD, display style, display content and other information. 

(7) Designers should make use of aesthetic principles to ensure the simplicity and unity of the 
interface while realizing the aesthetics of the interface. 

The design evaluation of automobile HUD can be carried out through two aspects: subjective 
evaluation and objective evaluation. After the interface prototype is designed, the designer can 
use  the  NASA  TLX  multidimensional  evaluation  scale,  user  perceptual  evaluation,  TAM 
technology acceptance model and other perceptual evaluation methods for users to evaluate the 
design  results  subjectively.  Road  tests  and  eye  tracking  experiments  are  commonly  used  to 
collect  objective  data.  Designers  can  re-examine  and  modify  the  design  results  through  the 
evaluation results, and strive to achieve the optimal interface usability. 

 
 
 
 
5 Future research prospects 

5.1 Immersive interactive experience based on scene services 

AR-HUD is a technology that superimposes virtual reality. If the virtual field of perception and 
information  coexist,  the  user's  media  consciousness  will  be  relieved  and  immersed  in  the 
augmented reality environment. To a certain extent, this media scene is separated from the real 
time  and  space  and  reconstructs  the  spatial  pattern.  As  traditional  means  of  transportation 
gradually transition to intelligent mobility space, drivers are more inclined to use the space in 
the car as an independent third space in addition to home and office. On this basis, designers 
need  to  closely  integrate  service  design  with  usage  scenarios,  and  make  full  use  of  artificial 
intelligence  and  network  interconnection  to  enable  users  to  obtain  immersive  interactive 
experience. Multi-screen is the design trend of interior HMI in the future. Multi-screen in-car 
information interaction tends to be multi-modal. The design of automobile HUD should also 
take into account the collaboration and interaction with other screens to improve the information 
processing efficiency under multi-task flow. 

5.2 In-depth exploration and development of multi-sensory channels 

Current  multi-channel  studies  based  on  automobile  HUD  mostly  focus  on  audio-visual 
combination and gesture or voice control, but there are few studies on the interaction of sensory 
channels such as smell and touch. With the improvement of virtual algorithms, the development 
of neuroscience and the deepening of brain machine research, the design of automobile HUD 
with multi-sensory channels is no longer a fantasy. For example, HUD can be combined with 
other  wearable  devices  to  share  information  and  cooperate,  and  key  information  can  be 
transmitted to users by means of vibration, taste and sound through wearable devices such as 
smart watches and head-mounted display devices to enable multi-sensory interaction. 

5.3 Construct high simulation experiment platform 

In the real road driving, the driver's perception of the target distance is longer than the actual 
situation,  while  the  indoor  test  results  are  just  the  opposite.  It  can  be  seen  that  there  are 
significant differences between the HUD simulation experiment and the real road test results. If 
the  simulation  experiment  data  in  a  low-fidelity  environment  is  adopted,  the  driver  may 
misjudge the information in the real environment, leading to potential dangers. Therefore, the 
design, research and evaluation of automobile HUD should strive to improve the scientificity of 
human factor  testing,  and  it  is  suggested  to  build  a  high-fidelity  test platform and  develop  a 
simulation scene library to meet different needs. At the same time, the design evaluation system 
should be improved to ensure the authenticity and usability of the research results. 

6 Conclusions 

As an important part of automobile HMI in the information age, HUD has positive significance 
for future intelligent driving by optimizing driving experience and improving driving safety. 
This paper reviews the current research status of automobile HUD interface design from the 
perspective  of  human-computer  interaction,  and  discusses  interface  information  design  and 
automobile-machine  interaction  based  on  user,  time  and  space,  cognitive  psychology,  multi-

 
 
 
 
channel and other auxiliary scenarios. In view of the existing research results and shortcomings, 
three future research directions are proposed: immersive interactive experience, multi-sensory 
channel and the construction of high simulation experiment platform. The research in this paper 
can  provide  a  reference  for  the  human-machine  interface  interaction  design  of  the  new 
generation of HUD,  and  it  is  expected  that more researchers will put new perspectives, new 
technologies and new methods into the design and research of automobile HUD. 

References 

[1]  D.  Beck, W.  Park,  Perceived  Importance  of Automotive  HUD  Information  Items: a  Study  With 
Experienced HUD Users, IEEE Access. (2018) 
[2] Li, K.-G., Research on the Design of Automobile HUD Safety Prompt Information Interface Based 
on Context Awareness. Xuzhou: China University of Mining and Technology. (2020) 
[3] Zeng, Q.-S., Zhao, J.-H., Information Organization and Visual Design of Car Navigation Head-up 
Display. ZHUANGSHI Volume 15 No. 8. 66-67. (2014) 
[4] Wang, J., Wang, W., Hansen, P., Li, Y., You, F., The Situation Awareness and Usability Research 
of Different HUD HMI Design in Driving While Using Adaptive Cruise Control. In: HCI International 
2020  –  Late  Breaking  Papers:  Digital  Human  Modeling  and  Ergonomics,  Mobility  and  Intelligent 
Environments, Lecture Notes in Computer Science. pp. 236–248. (2020) 
[5]  de  Oliveira  Faria,  N.,  Kandil,  D.,  Gabbard,  J.L.,  Augmented  reality  head-up  displays  effect  on 
drivers’  spatial  knowledge  acquisition.  Proceedings  of  the  Human  Factors  and  Ergonomics  Society 
Annual Meeting 63, 1486–1487. (2019) 
[6] Liu, S., Yin, G., Research on Color Adaptation of Automobile Head-up Display Interface. In: 2021 
IEEE 8th International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Applications (ICIEA). (2021) 
[7]  Gabbard,  J.L.,  Smith,  M.,  Merenda,  C.,  Burnett,  G.,  Large,  D.R.,  A  Perceptual  Color-Matching 
Method  for  Examining  Color  Blending  in  Augmented  Reality  Head-Up  Display  Graphics.  IEEE 
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 2834–2851. (2022) 
[8]  Guan,  C.,  HUD-oriented  color  layering  strategy  and  ergonomic  evaluation.  Nanjing:  Southeast 
University. (2020) 
[9] Zhang, H., Yu, Z., Zhang, C., Zhang, R., Liu, Y., Lee, S., User-Centered Information Architecture 
of Vehicle AR-HUD Interface. (2022) 
[10]  Aydogdu,  S.,  Luzuriaga,  M.,  Schick,  B.,  How  Can  We  Improve  the  Driving  Experience  with 
Human-Machine-Interface for Automated Driving? In: Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, 
Advances in Usability, User Experience, Wearable and Assistive Technology. pp. 218–224. (2020) 
[11] Charissis, V., Papanastasiou, S., Human–machine collaboration through vehicle head up display 
interface. Cognition, Technology &amp; Work 41–50. (2010) 
[12] Karatas, N., Tanaka, T., Fujikake, K., Yoshihara, Y., Kanamori, H., Fuwamoto, Y., Yoshida, M., 
Evaluation of AR-HUD Interface During an Automated Intervention in Manual Driving. (2020) 
[13] Du, P.-F., Research on Human-Computer Interaction Interface Design of Unmanned Taxi Based 
on Explicit Interaction Characteristics. Changsha: Hunan University. (2020) 
[14]  de  Oliveira  Faria,  N.,  Evaluating  Automotive  Augmented  Reality  Head-up  Display  Effects  on 
Driver  Performance  and  Distraction.  In:  2020  IEEE  Conference  on  Virtual  Reality  and  3D  User 
Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW). (2020) 

 
 
 
 
[15] Kim, H., Gabbard, J.L., Assessing Distraction Potential of Augmented Reality Head-Up Displays 
for Vehicle Drivers. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 852–
865. (2022) 
[16] Wang, W., Song, F., Zhu, T., SAME: The Design Space for Seamless Automotive Multimodal 
Experience. IT Professional 24, 35–42. (2022) 
[17] Han, Z.-H., Study on Interaction Design of AR-HUD Takeover Mode in Autonomous Driving. 
Shijiazhuang: Heibei University of Science and Technology. (2019)  

 
 
 
 
