Influence of Pedestrian Collision Warning Systems on Driver 
Behavior – A Driving Simulator Study  

Snehanshu Banerjee1, Mansoureh Jeihani2, Nashid K Khadem2, Md. Muhib 

Kabir2,      

1* – Omni Strategy LLC, Baltimore MD 
2* – Department of Transportation and Infrastructure Studies – Morgan State University, 
Baltimore, MD 21251 
email: snban1@morgan.edu; nakha3@morgan.edu; mdkab1@morgan.edu; 
mansoureh.jeihani@morgan.edu  

Abstract 

With the advent of connected and automated vehicle (CAV) technology, there is an increasing need to evaluate 
driver behavior while using such technology. In this first of a kind study, a pedestrian collision warning (PCW) 
system using CAV technology, was introduced in a driving simulator environment, to evaluate driver braking 
behavior, in the presence of a jaywalking pedestrian. A total of 93 participants from diverse socio-economic 
backgrounds were recruited for this study, for which a virtual network of downtown Baltimore was created. 
An eye tracking device was also used to observe distractions and head movements. A Log logistic accelerated 
failure time (AFT) distribution model was used for this analysis, to calculate speed reduction times; time from 
the moment the pedestrian becomes visible, to the point where a minimum speed was reached, to allow the 
pedestrian  to  pass.  The  presence  of  the  PCW  system  significantly  impacted  the  speed  reduction  time  and 
deceleration rate, as it increased the former and reduced the latter, which proves the effectiveness of this system 
in providing  an  effective  driving  maneuver, by  drastically  reducing  speed.  A  jerk  analysis  is  conducted  to 
analyze the suddenness of braking and acceleration. Gaze analysis showed that the system was able to attract 
the attention of the drivers, as the majority of the drivers noticed the displayed warning. The familiarity of the 
driver  with  the  route  and  connected  vehicles  reduces  the  speed  reduction  time;  gender  also  can  have  a 
significant impact as males tend to have longer speed reduction time, i.e. more time to comfortably brake and 
allow the pedestrian to pass. 

Keywords – Connected vehicles, Pedestrian collision warning, Driving simulator, Eye tracking 

1. Introduction 

Pedestrian safety is one of the main priorities in designing any traffic network. However, this 
category  of  road  users  is  often  referred  to  as  Vulnerable  Road  Users  (VRUs)  due  to  their 
vulnerability  to  road  accidents  and  fatalities  [1,  2].  According  to  the  National  Highway  Traffic 
Safety Administration (NHTSA), there were 5,977 pedestrian fatalities across the US in 2017 [3]. 
Moreover, pedestrian fatalities in urban areas increased by 46% from 2008 [3] and most of these 
fatalities resulted from driver distraction, obstruction of visibility or distraction and unawareness of 
an oncoming vehicle from the pedestrians perspective [4].  

As  a  result,  improving  pedestrian  safety  has  become  the  main  goal  of  several  transportation 
agencies, as they focus on developing warning systems to alert drivers, when pedestrians are on 
their path. The earliest of these systems were based on cameras and laser sensors [4]. Nevertheless, 
these systems were not that effective in improving the safety of pedestrians as these sensors have a 

- 1 -  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fixed  line-of-sight  and  angle  of  view  which,  in  some  instances,  are  not  capable  of  detecting 
pedestrians  behind  certain  obstacles  or  around  building  corners,  as  well  as,  in  bad  weather 
conditions [4, 5]. To overcome these drawbacks, new systems that integrate pedestrians into the 
vehicles’ network through smartphones, known as vehicle-to-pedestrian (V2P) and pedestrian-to-
vehicle (P2V) systems, or more generally, vehicle-to-everything (V2X), has been developed  [6]. 
The main advantage of these systems is that drivers will be able to know the presence of pedestrians 
even when they are obstructed by an object or in the dark [7]. In general, V2P and P2V systems 
aim to communicate between the vehicles and pedestrians via a wireless technology and cellular 
networks and send alerts, either to the driver or the pedestrians, about the presence of the other 
party via text messages and app alerts [2]. 

Hence, several research studies have been conducted in order to test the effectiveness of the 
V2P and P2V warning systems in enhancing the safety for the road users through assessing different 
driving experience parameters, with and without the use of these systems. These research studies 
can be classified under two main categories: those that examined the system’s performance and 
those that examined the driving and/or pedestrian behavior and performance after using the V2P or 
P2V  systems;  albeit  the  vast  majority  belongs  to  the  first  category.  In  addition,  there  were  two 
testing techniques used in these research studies, to test the performance of the pedestrian warning 
systems which were either through driving simulators or field tests. 

As  for  the  pedestrian  warning  systems’  safety  performance,  Hussein  et  al.  [8]  evaluated  the 
collision prediction for a V2P and P2V smartphone application and, through a field test, the system 
was able to detect the approaching vehicle, five seconds earlier than the in-vehicle sensing devices. 
Wang et al. [9] used a field experiment to test the car detection performance and maximum detection 
distance of a V2P application called “Walksafe”. Through this experiment, the system was able to 
correctly detect the approaching cars in 77% of the cases (total of 109 cases), with only three cases 
of false positive detection, at a maximum detection distance of 50 meters, were recorded. Similarly, 
Li et al. [10] assessed the precision ratio, using the potential arrival area (PAA) measure, of a V2P 
system called V2PSense. In the field experiment, the researchers designed six routes, each requiring 
eight minutes to traverse, and calculated the PAA, every minute. Through this experiment, it was 
found that the precision ratio for all six routes was above 85%, ranging from 86.9% to 98.8%, with 
an average of 92.6%. While Liu et al. [11] assessed the safety performance of a Pedestrian-Oriented 
Forewarning System (POFS) in terms of the probability of alerting the pedestrian at the right time. 
The  researchers  conducted  a  field  experiment  at  30km/hr  and  60km/hr  and  found  that  the 
probability is at least 90% at both speeds. He et al. [2], found, through a field experiment, that the 
use of a  V2P system will decrease  the  collision risk significantly, even reaching zero. Agreeing 
with these results, Sugimoto, Nakamura and Hashimoto [12] conducted a field experiment to assess 
the  performance  of  a  P2V  system  and  found  that  the  collision  risk  between  the  vehicle  and 
pedestrians is greatly reduced as the driver can stop the vehicle at 5m before reaching the pedestrian. 
On the other hand, some studies examined the driving behavior and performance after using the 
V2P  or  P2V  systems.  Of  these  studies,  Kim  et  al.  [13]  assessed  the  drivers’  behavior  and 
performance when using a pedestrian warning system through a field experiment using distance-
based measures. The researchers used eye-tracking glasses and in-vehicle cameras, as well as, GPS 
data to measure the change in driver’s behavior after receiving warnings from the system. Two of 
the parameters used in this study to evaluate the drivers’ behavior; are gaze on pedestrian, and foot-
on brake pedal. Regarding the gaze on pedestrian, distances decreased after presenting the warning 
in the far pedestrian condition as compared to no warning condition by 19.31% in the monoscopic 
display  and  25.21%  in  the  volumetric  display.  As  for  the  foot-on-brake  distances,  when  drivers 

- 2 -  

 
were presented with warnings, this parameter decreased by 32.44% and 36.15% in the monoscopic 
and volumetric conditions in the near pedestrian condition, respectively. Similarly, Rahimian et al. 
[7] tested the behavior of pedestrians with a smartphone which has a V2P application that detected 
the motion of vehicles and pedestrians and warned the pedestrians with an auditory alarm about the 
incoming vehicle, but did not provide instructions of whether to cross the road  or not. Through 
measuring the gaze direction of the pedestrians, using a specially fitted glasses, this experiment 
assessed the number of collisions that occurred as well as the pedestrians’ attention to traffic. By 
analyzing the data, there were 10 collisions out of the 28 trials; however, a warning was sent for 
each of these collisions; while, the pedestrians who received warnings spent less amount of time 
looking at traffic compared to those who did not receive it. However, Rahimian et al. [14] did not 
find  a  significant  difference  between  pedestrians  who  received  alerts  and  those  who  did  not,  in 
terms of amount of time spent before crossing. In addition, Cummings, Huang and Clamann  [15] 
designed  and  tested  a  smartphone  application  to  warn  pedestrians  of  incoming  vehicles  before 
crossing the street. In this field experiment, the researchers tested the pedestrians’ behavior to the 
alerts received in terms of their decision to perform unsafe or risky crossings. The results showed 
that of those who received late alerts, there were 16 unsafe crossings, or 33%, and of those who 
received the alerts just in time, there were 161 risky crossings, or 20%. 

Connected and Automated vehicle (CAV) technology is still in testing phases throughout the 
world while people have to pay higher premiums to get automated vehicle (AV) features, when 
they buy a new car, and as such, majority of the common people do not have the opportunity to 
drive a car with such safety features. Although a lot of researches have been conducted to evaluate 
influence of V2P systems on pedestrian reaction times, these studies were limited and had a lot of 
constraints, including driving at specific speeds  [12, 16]. The authors also found no studies that 
evaluate driver braking behavior involving a P2V warning system, using a driving simulator. In this 
study, a virtual network with P2V technology was created, where people were invited to drive with 
no  speed  constraints,  and  their  driving  behavior  and  experience,  when  subjected  to  this  CAV 
technology, were evaluated. 

2. Methods 

2.1. Driving simulator 

A  medium-fidelity  full  scale  driving  simulator  at  the  Morgan  State  University  Safety  and 
Behavioral Analysis (SABA) Center and a Tobii Pro eye tracking device  [17] was used for this 
study, to analyze driver behavior in response to a pedestrian collision warning (PCW), using P2V 
technology. The VR-Design studio software developed by FORUM8 Co. [18] was used to develop 
a virtual network of downtown Baltimore in Maryland. The idea behind choosing this location was 
such that, majority of the participants being familiar with the downtown Baltimore area, the virtual 
network  creates  a  more  realistic  driving  experience  for  them.  The  simulator  has  the  capability 
capture data such as steering wheel control, braking, acceleration and speed while the eye tracking 
device  can  capture  head  movements,  eye  gaze  and  gaze  durations,  all  in  real  time.  The  driving 
simulator and the eye tracking glasses are shown in Figure 1. 

- 3 -  

 
 
Figure 1. Driving simulator at Morgan State University and Tobii Pro eye tracking glasses 

2.2. Scenario and network design 

A network was built replicating downtown Baltimore, in the Inner Harbor area. Two scenarios 
were designed for this study, one with the PCW and the other without the warning i.e. the base 
scenario. The base scenario was tested first, followed by some other scenarios involving different 
CAV features and then the scenario with PCW, to avoid bias or the learning effect of the driving 
simulator. A major one-way four-lane road, Pratt Street, with a speed limit of 30 mph, in downtown 
Baltimore, was designed using the VR-Studio software. Pratt street has a lot of foot traffic and as 
such  would  be  an  ideal  location  to  evaluate  a  PCW  system,  when  encountering  a  jaywalking 
pedestrian. A level of service B, i.e. light traffic was used in these scenarios, so that the participants 
do not  slow down,  due  to  high  traffic  which  may  have  been  the  case  otherwise,  creating  issues 
evaluating the PCW system. Pratt street is a complete street, with a 14-foot-wide wide shared bus 
and bike lane, three 12-foot lanes and wider sidewalks. The proposed PCW system takes advantage 
of  the  P2V  technology on  the  pedestrian’s  smartphone  to  broadcast  the  device’s  position  to  the 
warning  enabled  vehicle.  For  both  the  baseline  and  PCW  system  scenarios,  as  soon  as  the 
participant crosses a waypoint, a jaywalking pedestrian appears at an approximate distance of 40 
meters from the waypoint, which then broadcasts the device/pedestrian location to the oncoming 
vehicle. The distance of 40 meters was chosen based on visibility, traffic conditions, road geometry 
and most importantly NHTSA guidelines on stopping distance, to avoid collision. According to the 
guidelines, to avoid a collision, the initial gap between the vehicle and the pedestrian, should be 
greater than the stopping sight distance of the vehicle. It is expressed as [19]: 

                                                      𝐷0 >  

2
−𝑉𝑣𝑖
2𝑎𝑣

                                                                         (1) 

- 4 -  

 
 
 
 
 
where, 𝐷0 is the initial gap between the vehicle and the pedestrian, 𝑉𝑣𝑖 is the initial speed and 𝑎𝑣 is 
the acceleration/deceleration of the vehicle. A snapshot for this event is shown in Figure 2. 

Figure 2. A snapshot of the driving simulator environment 

2.3. Participants 

Institutional  Review  Board  (IRB)  approval  was  received  before  human  participants  were 
recruited, where 93 participants from diverse socio-economic backgrounds took part in this study. 
Participants  were  recruited  through  a  combination  of  emails  to  participants  from  prior  studies 
involving the driving simulator [20-27], distribution of flyers across the university and throughout 
Baltimore  County.  Participants  were  paid  at  the  rate  of  $15  per  hour  of  driving,  for  their 
involvement in the study. The study was briefly explained to the participants and they were given 
an  opportunity  to  get  familiar  with  the  driving  simulator.  Two  pre  and  post  scenario  survey 
questionnaires were developed to gather information on sociodemographics, CAV experiences and 
experience using the driving simulator. Table 1 presents some of the descriptive statistics of the 
participants as well as selected pre driving questionnaires. 

Table 1. Participant socio-demographics 

Variables 
Gender 

Age 

Characteristics 
Female 
Male 
18-25 
26-35 
36-45 
46-55 
>55 

Percentage 
44 
56 
37 
29 
14 
12 
8 

Education Level 

High School or less 
College degree 
Post-graduate 

12 
61 
27 

- 5 -  

 
 
 
 
 
Household income level 

Familiarity with CAVs 

Familiarity with downtown 
Baltimore 

<$20,000 
$20,000 - $49,999 
$50,000 - $99,999 
>$100,000 

AVs only 
CVs only 
CAVs 
None 

Yes 
Somewhat 
No 

27 
34 
22 
17 

27 
5 
24 
43 

59 
34 
7 

2.4. Hazard-based duration model 

Hazard-based  duration  models  are  probabilistic  methods  that  are  used  to  evaluate  cases  that 
have a definite origin point until the occurrence of an event [28]. In the transportation field, these 
models have been used to study a number of time-related events such as assessing critical factors 
impacting crash durations and thus developing crash duration prediction models [29-31], evaluating 
the impacts of cellphone usage on driver reaction time in response to a pedestrian crossing the road 
[32, 33], modeling the duration of highway traffic incidents [34-36], etc. The duration variable used 
in this study, is the speed reduction time, which is calculated from the moment,  the  jaywalking 
pedestrian  becomes  visible  to  the  participant  driving  the  simulator,  until  a  minimum  speed  is 
reached i.e. the participants lets the pedestrian cross or comes to a complete stop. A proportional 
hazard and an accelerated failure time (AFT) model, are two of the approaches that could have been 
used for this analysis. These models are used to evaluate the influence of covariates on the hazard 
function. As compared to the hazard model where the hazard ratios are assumed to be constant over 
time,  the  AFT  model  enables  the  covariates  to  accelerate  time  in  a  survivor  function,  when  all 
covariates are zero, resulting in easier interpretation [37]. Based on this, an AFT modeling approach 
was selected for this study. 

2.5. Longitudinal jerk analysis 

Jerk is termed as the rate of change in acceleration or deceleration. Jerk can be either positive 
or negative. Positive longitudinal jerk values are associated with the abrupt release of the brakes, 
immediately followed by pressing the gas or throttle while negative longitudinal jerk values are 
associated  with  the  abrupt  release  of  the  gas  or  throttle,  immediately  followed  by  pressing  the 
brakes. The magnitudes of both the positive and negative jerks depend on the abruptness and extent 
to which the brakes and the throttle are pressed or released. 

The boundaries for comfortable jerk were found to be ± 1m/𝒔𝟑 while the acceptable limits of 

longitudinal jerk were defined as ± 2m/𝒔𝟑 [38]. Based on these limits, jerks can be classified as: 

-1 m/𝒔𝟑 ≤ Jerk ≤ 1 m/𝒔𝟑 → Comfortable positive or negative jerk 
-2 m/𝒔𝟑 ≤ Jerk ≤ -1 m/𝒔𝟑 → Acceptable negative jerk 
1 m/𝒔𝟑 ≤ Jerk ≤ 2 m/𝒔𝟑 → Acceptable positive jerk 
Jerk < -2 m/𝒔𝟑 Or Jerk > 2 m/𝒔𝟑 → Unsafe jerk values 

- 6 -  

 
 
 
 
3. Results and Discussion 

186 experiments were conducted; however, in 83 of those the participants either failed to yield 
to the pedestrian or missed them completely due to over speeding; thus, the final dataset used in the 
analysis  consisted  of  103  observations  of  the  participants’  braking  maneuvers.  The  braking 
maneuvers  of  the  participants,  the  moment  they  encounter  the  jaywalking  pedestrian,  were 
analyzed, in both the baseline scenario as well as the scenario involving a PCW system.  
The average deceleration rate (𝑑𝑚) at the moment the jaywalking pedestrian became visible until 
the participants slowed down to let the pedestrian pass or came to a complete stop is given by [39]: 

                                                      𝑑𝑚 =

2
2−𝑉𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑉𝑖
2(𝐿𝑉𝑚𝑖𝑛

− 𝐿𝑉𝑖

                                                              (2) 
)

where:  𝑉𝑖   is  participant’s  initial  speed  as  they  approach  the  waypoint  where  the  jaywalking 
pedestrian first becomes visible, 𝑉𝑚𝑖𝑛 represents participant’s minimum speed reached during the 
deceleration phase, 𝐿𝑉𝑖 is the distance between the vehicle’s location when the initial speed was 
recorded at the waypoint and the point at which the jaywalking pedestrian starts crossing the street, 
and  𝐿𝑉𝑚𝑖𝑛  represents  the  distance  between  the  vehicle’s  location  when  the  minimum  speed 
was recorded at the waypoint and the point at which the pedestrian starts crossing the street. 
The speed reduction time (𝑆) is calculated as the elapsed time between the participant’s initial speed 
(𝑉𝑖) and the minimum speed (𝑉𝑚𝑖𝑛) reached to allow the pedestrian to pass, before accelerating. 
A plot of the participants’ speed profile before and after the waypoint, 40 meters from where they 
first possibly spotted the pedestrian, was generated. Through this plot as shown in Figure 3, several 
parameters  related  to  the  participants’  braking  maneuvers  were  calculated.  It  can  be  seen  that 
participants braked harder, when they receive a PCW, compared to when not receiving a warning. 

Figure 3. Participant speed profile comparison 

- 7 -  

 
 
 
 
 
To determine the braking behavior with and without the PCW, a plot of the average deceleration 
rates of all participants are plotted in Figure 4. 

Figure 4. Participant average deceleration 

The deceleration rate in Figure 4 shows that, the participants braked earlier, at the onset of the PCW. 
Average maximum deceleration (-2.603 m/s2) for the PCW scenario is attained at 12 meters from 
the warning point, while maximum deceleration (-2.281 m/s2) for the Non-PCW scenario is attained 
at 13.5 meters from the potential warning point. To confirm this braking behavior, the perception 
reaction time taken to release the throttle and the brake execution time from the moment the throttle 
is released until the initial brake application, is calculated for each participant. The braking intensity 
is calculated, one second after the brakes are pressed to determine the intensity, where on a scale of 
0  to  1,  0  is  no  brake  force  and  1  is  maximum  brake  force.  The  average  reaction  and  braking 
execution time statistics are shown in Table 2. 

Average 
Perception 
Reaction 
Time (s) 

Table 2. Reaction and braking execution time statistics 
Average 
Max 
Braking 
Intensity 
0.56 

Average  Time  to 
Reach 
Max 
Deceleration (s) 

Average 
Brake 
Execution 
Time (s) 

0.2 

1.75 

Average  Max 
Speed 
Change (m/s) 

5.53 

6.03 

PCW 

No PCW 

0.29 

0.36 

0.2 

2 

0.47 

- 8 -  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From Table 2, it can be seen that, participants react quicker in the presence of a PCW system. The 
average perception reaction time is quicker in the PCW scenario, as the participants get the warning 
before they can anticipate the pedestrian, and thus start braking early, gradually slowing down to 
let the  pedestrian pass. The average  time  to reach  maximum deceleration is 1.75 seconds and 2 
seconds  respectively,  for  the  PCW  and  Non-PCW  scenario  which  confirms  the  hard-braking 
behavior. The average maximum braking intensities at these points were 0.56 and 0.47 respectively. 
The average maximum speed change is the difference in speed from the warning point until the 
average maximum deceleration is reached. The slightly higher speed change (6.03 m/s compared 
to 5.53 m/s) can be attributed to the distance traversed in the additional 0.25 seconds.  
From Table 2, it can be said that, participants took slightly longer to react in the absence of a PCW 
system.  The  braking  intensity  and  the  total  duration  of  the  perception  reaction  time,  and  brake 
execution time with a PCW system (total duration of 0.49 sec), show that hard braking is involved 
in the initial stages of a PCW system. The hard braking in the PCW scenario can be confirmed as 
maximum  declaration  is  reached  at  1.75  seconds  compared  to  the  2  seconds,  in  the  Non-PCW 
scenario, supported by the average maximum braking intensity (0.56 compared to 0.47) from Table 
2, at the maximum deceleration points. 

3.1. Jerk analysis 

Jerk is calculated for each participant and averaged over every second, from the waypoint where 

the PCW is issued. The participants average jerk, every tenth of a second, is shown in Figure 5. 

Figure 5. Participants Average Jerk by Time 

- 9 -  

 
 
 
 
It can be seen that, in the scenario with the PCW, the average initial jerk around 1.1 second after 
the warning is issued, is way below the acceptable jerk limit [38] and is thus unsafe. On the other 
hand,  in  the  scenario  without  the  PCW,  around  2.8  seconds  after  the  waypoint,  the  jerk  is  the 
maximum at 7.6 m/s3. This being a positive jerk, it is from the sudden release of the brakes and can 
be termed as a highly uncomfortable jerk. The jerk drops sharply at 2.8 seconds and is still positive, 
which  means  that,  the  participants  in  the  Non-PCW  scenario,  press  the  throttle  suddenly.  This 
signifies that the participants slowed down enough, to let the jaywalking pedestrian pass, before 
accelerating.  

3.2. Log logistic AFT model 

An  ANOVA  analysis  revealed  that  there  was  a  statistically  significant  difference  in  speed 
reduction  times  between  the baseline  scenario  and  the  scenario  with  a  PCW  system.  The  speed 
reduction times were longer in the scenario involving the PCW system (mean difference in time = 
0.61 seconds, ρ ≤ 0.05) at 3.14 seconds compared to 2.53 seconds in the baseline scenario. This 
implies that the overall deceleration rate when the PCW was used, is less compared to when the 
system was not used (2.99 m/s2 vs. 3.19 m/s2). Although, this infers a smoother braking maneuver, 
it is not the case as seen in Figure 4. Since deceleration rate or braking behavior is affected by CAV 
technology,  in  this  case  a  PCW  system,  a  hazard-based  duration  model  was  developed  to 
comprehend the participant’s braking behavior in terms of speed reduction times. As demonstrated 
by Bella and Silvestri [39], this dependent variable is a positive duration dependence event as its 
probability increases as a result of an increase in the available time. A distribution assumption of 
the speed reduction time variable is required to estimate the hazard and the survival functions in a 
parametric setting. The hazard function gives the conditional failure rate while the survival function 
is the probability of a longer speed reduction time than a specified time. The most commonly used 
are the lognormal, log-logistic, exponential and Weibull distribution functions. In order to select 
the best fit and most applicable function, the Akaike information criterion (AIC), which is one of 
the most well-known approaches for model selection based on their adequacy  [40, 41], and log-
likelihood values were used. The four distributions were assessed, and it was found that the log-
logistic model provides the best fit for the data as it had the lowest AIC values at -382.73 and the 
highest log-likelihood values at -128.158, among them. The hazard function ℎ(𝑡) of the log-logistic 
duration model is expressed as [42]: 

                                                         ℎ(𝑡) =

𝜆𝑝𝑡𝑝−1
1 + 𝜆𝑡𝑝                                                                 (3) 

with 𝑝 > 0 and 𝜆 > 0 and the survival function 𝑆(𝑡) of the log-logistic duration model is expressed 
as [42]: 

                                              𝑆(𝑡)   =  

1

1 + 𝜆𝑡𝑝  

1

1
𝑝𝑡)𝑝

1 + (𝜆

                                                           (4) 

where 𝜆 and 𝑝 are the location and the scale parameters, while 𝑡 is the specified time, respectively. 
Table 3 shows the descriptive statistics of the different parameters used in the log-logistic model 
and the speed reduction times of the participants in both the baseline scenario as well as the scenario 
involving the PCW system. 

- 10 -  

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Table 3. Speed reduction time and Log logistic AFT variable descriptives 
Mean Value 
(PCW) 

Std. Dev 
(No Warning) 

Mean Value 
(No warning) 

Variables 

𝑉𝑖 (m/s) 
𝐿𝑉𝑖 (m) 
𝑉𝑚𝑖𝑛 (m/s) 
𝐿𝑉𝑚𝑖𝑛 (m) 
𝑑𝑚 (m/s2) 
Speed Reduction Time(s) 

11.18 

50.67 

1.85 

70.63 

3.19 

2.53 

3.11 

0.44 

1.92 

9.16 

1.04 

0.62 

10.90 

50.55 

1.33 

71.77 

2.99 

3.14 

Std. Dev 
(PCW) 

3.33 

0.34 

1.76 

7.98 

1.45 

0.95 

Moreover, in order to assess the goodness of fit for the log-logistic model, a plot of the cumulative 
hazard  rate  was  determined  from  the  model  estimates  and  then  utilized  to  build  an  empirical 
estimate of the cumulative hazard model. As seen in Figure 6, the points representing the estimate 
of the cumulative hazard function almost follow the 45° reference line; hence, it can be inferred 
that the participants’ predicted speed reduction time, using the log-logistic model, is a good fit with 
the observed data. 

Figure 6. Cox-snell residuals for Log logistic AFT 

The estimates from the Log logistic AFT model with the speed reduction times of the participants 
as the dependent variable are shown in Table 4. 

- 11 -  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Variables 

Estimate 

Std. Error 

z 

ρ 

Exp (β) 

Table 4. Log logistic AFT parameter estimates 

(Intercept) 
𝑉𝑖 (m/s) 
𝐿𝑉𝑖 (m) 
Vmin (m/s) 
Average Deceleration 
Rate 𝑑𝑚 (m/s2) 
PCW system 

Gender - Male 
Not familiar with 
downtown Baltimore 

Familiar with CAVs 

Scale Parameter P 

AIC 
Log-likelihood at 
convergence 

12.317 

0.059 

-0.008 

-0.038 

-0.245 

0.074 

0.420 

0.104 

-0.060 

2.628 
-382.730 

-128.158 

Number of groups 

103 
* Statistically significant at 99% CI  

70.911 

0.006 

0.048 

0.010 

0.016 

0.031 

0.144 

0.060 

0.042 

0.085 

0.173 

8.892 

-0.162 

-3.811 

-15.343 

2.423 

2.914 

1.723 

-1.417 

0.862 

223521.809 

0.000* 

0.872 

0.000* 

0.000* 

0.010* 

0.004* 

0.085 

0.156 

1.062 

0.992 

0.962 

0.782 

1.077 

1.522 

1.110 

0.942 

Table  4  identifies  the  variables  that  are  statistically  significant  to  the  participants’  speed 
reduction  times,  in  response  to  the  jaywalking  pedestrian.  The  variables  significant  at  a  99% 
confidence interval were the initial speeds recorded at the waypoint, the minimum speeds reached 
in the deceleration phase, the average deceleration rates, the PCW system compared to the baseline, 
and gender. If the initial speed increases, the speed reduction time would also indirectly increase 
by 6.2% (odds ratio = 1.062), whereas the speed reduction times would decrease by 3.8% (odds 
ratio = 0.962) and 21.8% (odds ratio = 0.782) if there is a decrease in the minimum speed and the 
average deceleration rate. In the presence of a PCW system, the participants’ speed reduction time 
increases by 7.7% (odds ratio = 1.077), which infers that the PCW system is the more effective 
system in improving speed reduction times, i.e., more time to transition to an acceptable speed or 
come to a stop, to yield to the pedestrian. Odds of male participants having a higher speed reduction 
time on average was 52.2% more than their female counterparts (odds ratio = 1.522), which implies 
that  the  male  participants  braked  aggressively  initially,  and  then  proceeded  slowly,  until  the 
pedestrian had passed. A scale parameter estimate of 2.628 implies that the survival probability of 
the speed reduction times decreases with the passage of time. 

A representation of the participants’ braking patterns can be shown by plotting survival curves 
of the speed reduction times for the baseline scenario and the scenario involving the PCW system. 
These predictions were done based on the predict survival regression tool in the R-package [43] 
and shown in Figure 7. 

- 12 -  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Speed reduction time survival curves 

From Figure 7, it can be seen that the speed reduction time survival probability decreases with 
the  passage  of  time.  A  lower  survival  probability  was  recorded  for  the  baseline  scenario  as 
compared to the scenario with the PCW system. At 3 seconds of speed reduction time, the survival 
probability for the baseline scenario was 21% compared to 43% for the scenario with the PCW 
system, and it drops even further at 4.5 seconds, to only 5% in the baseline scenario to 13% in the 
PCW system scenario. The speed reduction time was 0.42 seconds longer (statistically significant) 
in the presence of a PCW system, giving the participants longer time to brake and transition to a 
safe stop. 

3.3. Eye Gaze Analysis 

This study used Tobii Pro Glasses 2 [17], the eye tracking device and its analysis software. The 
data was extracted and merged with the driving simulator using a novel application [44]. Both the 
scenarios, the baseline and the one with the PCW system, were evaluated, to analyze where the 
participants glanced while at the waypoint. If the participant glances at any object for a moment, it 
is captured by the eye tracking device. In this analysis, the glance is recorded at the waypoint, which 
is when the jaywalking pedestrian first becomes visible.  A heat map can be generated using the 
number of fixations the participants made in certain areas, with red indicating the highest number 
of fixations and green indicating the least number of fixations. The generated heat map just shows 
a count of the number of fixations on the object or area of interest. An eye gaze heat map analysis 

- 13 -  

 
 
 
 
of the 103 participants, the moment the vehicles cross the 40-meter threshold, is shown in Figure 
8.  

Figure 8. Eye tracking gaze analysis 

Figure 8 clearly shows that the participants glanced at the PCW and this possibly affected their 
speed reduction times compared to the baseline scenario in which even though they may not be 
distracted, it may be difficult to observe the pedestrian at that very moment. This infers that having 
a PCW system informs the driver of an oncoming pedestrian, giving them plenty of time to react 
accordingly. The gaze data also shows that participants who glanced at the PCW popup had longer 
speed reduction times compared to participants who did not look at the popup. 

From  the  videos  recorded  using  the  eye  tracker,  it  was  observed  that,  of  the  27%  of  the 
participants who did not stop or ran over the jaywalking pedestrian in the baseline scenario, 64% 
of these participants did actually stop for the pedestrian in the PCW system scenario, confirming 
the  benefits  a  PCW  system.  The  authors  did  not  find  any  significant  correlation  with 
sociodemographics of the participants and eye gaze analysis. 

4. Conclusions 

The  application,  a  PCW  system,  was  tested  on  driver  braking  behavior  using  a  full-scale, 
medium  fidelity  driving  simulator  and  an  eye  tracking  device.  Ninety-three  participants  were 

- 14 -  

 
 
 
 
 
involved in this study, contributing to 186 simulation sessions. The scenarios were evaluated for 
the participants’ braking behavior at the sudden appearance of a jaywalking pedestrian in the form 
of speed reduction times using a Log logistic AFT  model. It was observed that speed reduction 
times were higher in the presence of a PCW system and men were more inclined to have a higher 
speed reduction time compared to women, leading to an initial aggressive braking behavior. This 
suggests that, the presence of a PCW system sends a clear message to the driver about the presence 
of a pedestrian, giving the driver ample time to adapt their initial approach speed to yield to the 
pedestrian. Although, the warning may force the drivers to brake aggressively initially, the objective 
of the system to protect the pedestrian will be fulfilled. These findings were substantiated by the 
jerk analysis, which shows that, jerk is unsafe, in the initial seconds of a PCW, while the scenario 
without the PCW system, results in a highly uncomfortable jerk, when the pedestrian is closer to 
the  vehicle.  These  results  confirm  those  obtained  by  [13]  and  [45]  whose  pedestrian  warning 
systems had significant impacts on the drivers’ performance; albeit the results from [46] contradict 
these findings as this study found no significant impact of the system on the deceleration rate. The 
overall  analysis  also  suggested  that  high  initial  approach  speeds,  decrease  in  minimum  speeds 
during  the  deceleration  phase,  and  a  decrease  in  average  deceleration  rates  have  a  significant 
positive influence on the speed reduction times. An interesting observation from the post simulation 
survey questionnaire was that 31% of the participants said that a PCW system was their top choice 
of CAV technology to have in their automobiles. The eye tracking analysis showed that majority 
of the participants did glance at the PCW as compared to observing other objects; its absence may 
impact the reaction time needed to stop for the pedestrian. A longer speed reduction time means 
that,  although  this  may  involve  aggressive  braking  initially,  the  drivers  will  eventually  pace 
themselves at a speed that will allow the pedestrian to pass safely. This may also be true for drivers 
who  exceed  the  safe  speed  limit  of  the  road  and  may  not  brake  appropriately  to  stop  for  the 
pedestrian  in  time,  if not  for the  PCW.  Although  the  PCW  systems  had  longer  speed  reduction 
times, the participants braked aggressively initially, at the onset of the warning, before gradually 
slowing down and coming to a stop. This may not be the ideal scenario in terms of avoiding rear 
end collisions at the moment, but it will possibly help prevent pedestrian crashes. Consequently, it 
is anticipated that these systems will be more widely adopted by the automobile manufacturers and 
come prebuilt into the vehicles rather than an optional package, as they will help improve the safety 
of all road users and reduce congestion. As drivers become more accustomed to the technology, 
they  may  not  need  to  brake  aggressively  initially  and  could  be  more  gradual  throughout  the 
deceleration phase. 

Although,  predictive  emergency  braking  systems  is  a  relatively  new  technology  [47],  its 
influence on driver behavior needs to be researched. Future studies would involve combining PCW 
with automatic emergency braking systems and evaluating driver reaction times, in this scenario. 

5. Acknowledgements 

This  study  was  supported  by  the  Urban  Mobility  and  Equity  Center,  a  Tier  1  University 
Transportation Center of the U.S. DOT University Transportation Centers Program at Morgan State 
University. The authors would like to acknowledge  the guidance and support received from Dr. 
Young-Jae Lee, Associate Professor at Morgan State University.  

- 15 -  

 
 
 
 
 
6. References 

[1] 

[2] 

[3] 

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[10] 

[11] 

[12] 

[13] 

[14] 

Facts 

Safety 

Research  Note," 

2018,  Available: 

J.  J.  Anaya,  P.  Merdrignac,  O.  Shagdar,  F.  Nashashibi,  and  J.  E.  Naranjo,  "Vehicle  to 
pedestrian  communications  for  protection  of  vulnerable  road  users,"  in  2014  IEEE 
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium Proceedings, 2014, pp. 1037-1042: IEEE. 
S. He, J. Li, and T. Z. Qiu, "Vehicle-to-pedestrian communication modeling and collision 
avoiding  method  in  connected  vehicle  environment,"  Transportation  Research  Record, 
vol. 2621, no. 1, pp. 21-30, 2017. 
NHTSA, 
"Traffic 
https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/ViewPublication/812603. 
A. Tahmasbi-Sarvestani, H. N. Mahjoub, Y. P. Fallah, E. Moradi-Pari, and O. Abuchaar, 
"Implementation and evaluation of a cooperative vehicle-to-pedestrian safety application," 
IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 62-75, 2017. 
S. Y. Gelbal, S. Arslan, H. Wang, B. Aksun-Guvenc, and L. Guvenc, "Elastic band based 
pedestrian  collision  avoidance  using  V2X  communication,"  in  2017  IEEE  Intelligent 
Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2017, pp. 270-276: IEEE. 
M.  Bagheri,  M.  Siekkinen,  and  J.  K.  Nurminen,  "Cellular-based  vehicle  to  pedestrian 
(V2P) adaptive communication for collision avoidance," in 2014 international conference 
on connected vehicles and expo (ICCVE), 2014, pp. 450-456: IEEE. 
P.  Rahimian,  E.  E.  O’Neal,  S.  Zhou,  J.  M.  Plumert,  and  J.  K.  Kearney,  "Harnessing 
vehicle-to-pedestrian  (V2P)  communication  technology:  sending  traffic  warnings  to 
texting pedestrians," Human factors, vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 833-843, 2018. 
A.  Hussein,  F.  García,  J.  M.  Armingol,  and  C.  Olaverri-Monreal,  "P2V  and  V2P 
Communication for Pedestrian Warning on the basis of Autonomous Vehicles," in  2016 
IEEE 19th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 2016, 
pp. 2034-2039: IEEE. 
T.  Wang,  G.  Cardone,  A.  Corradi,  L.  Torresani,  and  A.  T.  Campbell,  "WalkSafe:  a 
pedestrian safety app for mobile phone users who walk and talk while crossing roads," in 
Proceedings of the twelfth workshop on mobile computing systems & applications, 2012, 
p. 5: ACM. 
C.-Y. Li,  G. Salinas, P.-H. Huang, G.-H. Tu, G.-H. Hsu, and T.-Y. Hsieh, "V2PSense: 
Enabling  Cellular-based  V2P  Collision  Warning  Service  Through  Mobile  Sensing,"  in 
2018 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), 2018, pp. 1-6: IEEE. 
Z.  Liu,  L.  Pu,  Z.  Meng,  X.  Yang,  K.  Zhu,  and  L.  Zhang,  "POFS:  A  novel  pedestrian-
oriented  forewarning  system  for  vulnerable  pedestrian  safety,"  in  2015  International 
Conference on Connected Vehicles and Expo (ICCVE), 2015, pp. 100-105: IEEE. 
C.  Sugimoto,  Y.  Nakamura,  and  T.  Hashimoto,  "Prototype  of  pedestrian-to-vehicle 
communication system for the prevention of pedestrian accidents using both 3G wireless 
and WLAN communication," in 2008 3rd International Symposium on Wireless Pervasive 
Computing, 2008, pp. 764-767: IEEE. 
H. Kim, J. L. Gabbard, A. M. Anon, and T. Misu, "Driver behavior and performance with 
augmented  reality  pedestrian  collision  warning:  An  outdoor  user  study,"  IEEE 
transactions on visualization and computer graphics, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 1515-1524, 2018. 
P. Rahimian et al., "Using a  virtual environment to study the impact of sending traffic 
alerts to texting pedestrians," in 2016 IEEE Virtual Reality (VR), 2016, pp. 141-149: IEEE. 

- 16 -  

 
[16] 

[17] 
[18] 
[19] 

[15]  M.  C.  PI,  L.  Huang,  and  M. Clamann,  "HAL2019-01:  Development  and  Evaluation  of 
Vehicle  to  Pedestrian  (V2P)  Safety  Interventions  Prepared  for  the  UNC  Collaborative 
Sciences Center for Road Safety," 2019. 
N. Lubbe and J. Davidsson, "Drivers’ comfort boundaries in pedestrian crossings: A study 
in driver braking characteristics as a function of pedestrian walking speed," Safety science, 
vol. 75, pp. 100-106, 2015. 
A. Tobii, "Tobii pro glasses 2," ed, 2019. 
FORUM8. 3D VR & Visual Interactive Simulation. Available: http://www.forum8.com/ 
NHTSA, "Crash Avoidance Needs and Countermeasure Profiles for Safety Applications 
Based on Light-Vehicle-to-Pedestrian Communications " 2016. 
S. Banerjee, M. Jeihani, and N. K. Khadem, "Influence of work zone signage on driver 
speeding behavior," Journal of Modern Transportation, pp. 1-9, 2019. 
S.  Banerjee,  M.  Jeihani,  N.  K.  Khadem,  and  D.  D.  Brown,  "Units  of  information  on 
dynamic message signs: a speed pattern analysis," European Transport Research Review, 
vol. 11, no. 1, p. 15, 2019. 
S. Banerjee, M. Jeihani, and R. Moghaddam, "Impact of Mobile Work Zone Barriers on 
Driving Behavior on Arterial Roads," Journal of Traffic and Logistics Engineering Vol, 
vol. 6, no. 2, 2018. 

[21] 

[22] 

[20] 

[23]  M.  Jeihani,  S.  Banerjee,  S.  Ahangari,  and  D.  D.  Brown,  "The  Potential  Effects  of 
Composition and Structure of Dynamic Message Sign Messages on Driver Behavior using 
a Driving Simulator," 2018. 
Z. R. Moghaddam, M. Jeihani, S. Peeta, and S. Banerjee, "Comprehending the roles of 
traveler perception of travel time reliability on route choice behavior," Travel Behaviour 
and Society, vol. 16, pp. 13-22, 2019. 

[24] 

[25]  M. Jeihani, S. NarooieNezhad, and K. B. Kelarestaghi, "Integration of a driving simulator 
and  a  traffic  simulator  case  study:  exploring  drivers'  behavior  in  response  to  variable 
message signs," IATSS research, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 164-171, 2017. 

[27] 

[26]  M.  Jeihani,  S.  Banerjee,  M.  M.  Kabir,  and  N.  Khadem,  "Driver's  Interactions  with 
Advanced  Vehicles  in  Various  Traffic  Mixes  and  Flows  (Connected  and  Autonomous 
Vehicles (CAVs), Electric Vehicles (EVs), V2X, Trucks, Bicycles and Pedestrians)-Phase 
I: Driver Behavior Study and Parameters Estimation," 2020. 
S. Banerjee, M. Jeihani, N. K. Khadem, and M. M. Kabir, "Influence of red-light violation 
warning systems on driver behavior–a driving simulator study," Traffic injury prevention, 
vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 265-271, 2020. 
D. Collett, Modelling survival data in medical research. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2015. 
Y. Chung, "Development of an accident duration prediction model on the Korean Freeway 
Systems," Accident Analysis & Prevention, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 282-289, 2010. 
Y. Chung, L. F. Walubita, and K. Choi, "Modeling accident duration and its mitigation 
strategies on South Korean freeway systems," Transportation Research Record, vol. 2178, 
no. 1, pp. 49-57, 2010. 
A. T. Hojati,  L. Ferreira, S. Washington, P.  Charles, and A. Shobeirinejad, "Modelling 
total duration of traffic incidents including incident detection and recovery time," Accident 
Analysis & Prevention, vol. 71, pp. 296-305, 2014. 

[28] 
[29] 

[30] 

[31] 

[32]  M. M. Haque and S. Washington, "A parametric duration model of the reaction times of 
drivers distracted by mobile phone conversations," Accident Analysis & Prevention, vol. 
62, pp. 42-53, 2014. 

- 17 -  

 
[34] 

[33]  M. M. Haque and S. Washington, "The impact of mobile phone distraction on the braking 
behaviour of young drivers: a hazard-based duration model," Transportation research part 
C: emerging technologies, vol. 50, pp. 13-27, 2015. 
D. Nam and F. Mannering, "An exploratory hazard-based analysis of highway incident 
duration," Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice,  vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 85-
102, 2000. 
A.  T.  Hojati,  L.  Ferreira,  S.  Washington,  and  P.  Charles,  "Hazard  based  models  for 
freeway traffic incident duration," Accident Analysis & Prevention, vol. 52, pp. 171-181, 
2013. 

[35] 

[36]  W.  Junhua,  C.  Haozhe,  and  Q.  Shi,  "Estimating  freeway  incident  duration  using 

[37] 

[38] 

[39] 

[40] 

[41] 

[45] 

[46] 

[47] 

accelerated failure time modeling," Safety science, vol. 54, pp. 43-50, 2013. 
S. P. Washington, M. G. Karlaftis, and F. Mannering, Statistical and econometric methods 
for transportation data analysis. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2010. 
X. Wei and G. Rizzoni, "Objective metrics of fuel economy, performance and driveability-
A review," SAE Technical Paper0148-7191, 2004. 
F. Bella and M. Silvestri, "Driver's braking behavior approaching pedestrian crossings: a 
parametric  duration  model  of  the  speed  reduction  times,"  Journal  of  Advanced 
Transportation, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 630-646, 2016. 
K. P. Burnham and D. R. Anderson, "Multimodel inference: understanding AIC and BIC 
in model selection," Sociological methods & research, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 261-304, 2004. 
E. Wagenmakers and S. Farrell, "AIC model selection using Akaike weights, Psychon. B. 
Rev., 11, 192–196," ed, 2004. 
D. Zhang, "Modeling Survival Data with Parametric Regression Models," 2005. 

S. Banerjee, M. Jeihani,  and M. A. Sayed, "System and method for synchronization of 
asynchronous datasets," ed: Google Patents, 2021. 
A.  S.  Hakkert,  V.  Gitelman,  and  E.  Ben-Shabat,  "An  evaluation  of  crosswalk  warning 
systems: effects on pedestrian and vehicle behaviour," Transportation Research Part F: 
Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 275-292, 2002. 
N. Lubbe, "Brake reactions of distracted drivers to pedestrian Forward Collision Warning 
systems," Journal of safety research, vol. 61, pp. 23-32, 2017. 
B.  M.  Solutions.  (2019,  07/31/2019).  Predictive  emergency  braking  system.  Available: 
https://www.bosch-mobility-solutions.com/en/products-and-services/passenger-cars-and-
light-commercial-vehicles/driver-assistance-systems/predictive-emergency-braking-
system/ 

[42] 
[43]  M. T. Therneau, "Survival Analysis - R package," ed. 
[44] 

- 18 -  

 
 
