--- Page 1 ---
An Investigation of Augmented Reality Presentations of 
Landmark-Based Navigation using a Head-Up Display
Adam Bolton 
University of Nottingham 
Nottingham, UK 
adamjbolton@hotmail.co.uk 
Gary Burnett 
University of Nottingham 
Nottingham, UK 
gary.burnett@nottingham.ac.uk 
David R Large 
University of Nottingham 
Nottingham, UK 
david.r.large@nottingham.ac.uk 
ABSTRACT 
Using landmark-based navigation can greatly improve 
drivers’ route-finding performance. Previous research in 
this area has tended to focus on the inclusion of text or 
icon-based landmark information utilising dashboard-
mounted displays. In contrast, we present landmark-based 
navigation information using a Head-Up Display (HUD). A 
major issue with using landmarks for navigation is their 
inherent variability in quality, with many ‘poor’ candidates 
that are not easily identifiable or communicable. A 
proposed solution to improve the usefulness and utility of 
such landmarks is to highlight/enhance them using 
augmented reality (AR). Twenty participants undertook 
four drives in a driving simulator utilising an AR navigation 
system presented on a HUD. Participants were provided 
navigational instructions presented as either conventional 
distance-to-turn information, on-road arrows or augmented 
landmark information (arrow highlighting or box enclosing 
landmark adjacent to the required turning). Participants 
demonstrated significant performance improvements while 
using the AR landmark 'box’ presentations compared to 
conventional distance-to-turn information, with response 
times and success rates enhanced by 43.1% and 26.2%, 
respectively. Moreover, drivers reported a significant 
reduction in workload when using the AR landmark 
‘boxes’. We conclude that there are significant benefits to 
providing 
navigational 
information 
utilising 
AR 
presentations of landmark information on a HUD. 
Author Keywords 
Heads-Up Display; Augmented Reality; Landmarks; 
Navigation Systems. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION 
Originally deployed with aerospace, Head-Up Displays 
(HUD) have attracted significant interest within the 
automotive research community. By presenting information 
on a HUD, drivers are able to maintain their view of the 
road ahead whilst acquiring the displayed information, 
leading to improvements in driving performance and safety 
[9]. Traditionally, HUD in vehicles have been used to 
provide limited task-related information, such as current 
speed, revs, warnings, etc. More recently, researchers have 
investigated the potential of displaying other driving-related 
information on HUD, such as navigational advice/ 
instructions (with the aim of reducing navigational decision 
time and uncertainty) [3]. These studies have tended to 
simply re-present traditional distance-to-turn styles of 
information, previously intended for Head-Down Displays 
(HDD). Nevertheless, performance enhancements have still 
been realised.  
For example, in a comparative study involving a secondary 
observation task, participants achieved 100% success rate 
while following navigation information presented on a 
HUD, compared to 80% associated with the equivalent 
‘head-down’ display. The HUD navigation system was also 
deemed to be less physically and mentally demanding [12]. 
A similar study demonstrated that the gaze retention period 
(amount of time focused on the navigational cues) was 
significantly lower when using the HUD, suggesting that 
less time is ‘spent’ acquiring information from the HUD 
[2]. Both [9] and [11] reported similar preferences, in 
addition to improvements in driving performance, when 
using a HUD, with the latter study revealing that 72.2% of 
participants felt their driving was better when using the 
HUD and two thirds of participants expressed a preference 
towards using the HUD. However, opposite effects have 
been reported within other fields, such as aviation – pilots 
made more errors and collided with unexpected runway 
obstacles when using a HUD in a Boeing 727 simulator 
under conditions of low visibility and turbulence [7]. This 
was attributed to pilots directing attention towards the HUD 
imagery, rather than the real world situation, suggesting that 
pilots were not fully engaged with the outside world. This 
highlights 
the 
importance 
of 
ensuring 
that 
HUD 
information is presented in a manner that minimises 
distraction effects. [14] advise that priority should always 
be given to visual information corresponding to the primary 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
AutomotiveUI '15, September 01 - 03, 2015, Nottingham, United Kingdom 
© 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3736-6/15/09…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2799250.2799253 
56

--- Page 2 ---
task, and thus HUD information and iconography should 
not be placed such that it obscures real world information.  
A related concern is that of visual clutter, whereby too 
much information presented on the HUD can distract 
drivers and cause objects in the outside world to be missed. 
[16] highlighted the deleterious effects of visual clutter
when observing military personnel equipped with helmet‐
mounted displays (HMD) to detect targets hidden in terrain
in the far domain. Reductions in detection times when there
was no assistance from the HMD were attributed the highly
detailed display causing clutter. [1] thus recommend that a
maximum of three items can be displayed before
deterioration in performance occurs due to ‘clutter.’
The effect of workload on task performance may also 
influence a driver’s ability to acquire visual information 
presented on a HUD. Complex driving situations (dense 
traffic, complicated road situations, high road speed etc.) 
naturally elevates drivers’ cognitive and visual workload, 
compared with driving along a straight road absent of 
traffic. Furthermore, increases in secondary task demand 
will elevate overall workload, and may encourage drivers to 
prioritise the secondary task at the expense of driving, 
thereby diverting their attention in-vehicle and leading to 
decrements in driving performance (e.g. [15]). 
Landmarks 
There has been much interest regarding the use of 
landmarks to support route-finding. Using landmarks 
during the provision of directions is consistent with basic 
human wayfinding strategies [5] and has been shown to 
improve navigation and driving performance, increase 
driver 
confidence, 
improve 
engagement 
with 
the 
environment, promote enhanced spatial learning and reduce 
reliance on the navigation system, compared with 
conventional distance-to-turn systems [4].  
The provision of additional landmark information has been 
shown to significantly reduce navigational decision time, 
but failed to deliver any additional accuracy benefits [13], 
although this may have been due to the use of an over-
simplified driving scenario, where the ability to make errors 
was significantly compromised. Indeed, [10] found that 
using landmarks to navigate resulted in significantly fewer 
errors than using a conventional distance-to-turn device. 
Moreover, both [10] and [6] also witnessed an increase in 
both driver performance and confidence when using 
landmarks, and both studies demonstrated significantly 
lower frequency of glances to the in-vehicle display, 
thereby reducing eyes-off-road time.  
A key consideration when selecting a landmark for use in a 
navigation system is its ‘quality’ and effectiveness as a 
navigational aid. Several formative studies have taken place 
in order to determine the qualities that a ‘good’ navigational 
landmark should possess (e.g. [5]). A common consensus is 
that ‘good’ navigational landmarks should be permanent (in 
form and labelling), easily visible, unique, have a useful 
location and be easily identifiable. [10] found that the 
quality of navigational landmarks is extremely important as 
‘good’ landmarks resulted in a significant reduction in 
navigation errors when compared to landmarks deemed to 
be ‘poor’ navigational aids. Furthermore, drivers reported a 
higher confidence in route-finding when using ‘good’ 
landmarks. Examples of landmarks that are deemed to be 
‘good’ navigational cues, include: traffic lights, petrol 
stations, public houses, churches, schools and railway 
stations [5]. However, there may be certain situations in 
which the quality of ‘good’ landmarks is diminished 
(perhaps temporarily), e.g. a church obscured by summer 
vegetation, several sets of traffic lights in close proximity to 
each other etc. [4]. A possible solution, in these situations, 
is to enhance or augment the required landmark. 
The aforementioned ‘landmark’ studies, though revealing, 
were all conducted using ‘head-down’ in-vehicle displays, 
and to the authors’ knowledge, no research has been 
reported comparing landmark-based navigation presented 
on a HUD with conventional distance-to-turn system 
instructions presented in the same manner. It is 
hypothesized that, by augmenting navigational instructions 
with landmark information and presenting these on a HUD, 
synergetic benefits (HUD versus HDD and landmark versus 
conventional instructions) may be realised.  
A study was conducted to compare conventional distance-
to-turn information with augmented reality presentations of 
landmark-based navigation. The study aimed to investigate 
if landmark-based navigation reduced navigational decision 
time and enhanced navigational success compared to a 
conventional distance-to-turn approach. Furthermore, the 
study considered whether using AR to enhance potentially 
‘poor’ landmarks would increase their usability and utility 
as ‘good’ navigational landmark candidates. 
METHOD 
Participants 
Twenty participants were recruited to take part in the study 
(14 males, 6 females). Ages ranged from 21 to 54 years 
(mean, 27.7 years). All participants held a valid UK driving 
license, but were not necessarily regular drivers. Mean 
annual mileage for the 12 months prior to the study was 
4115 miles (max. 15,000 miles), with 9 participants driving 
daily and 11 driving occasionally. One participant used a 
navigation device on a weekly basis, 16 occasionally and 3 
never. Eight participants had previously used a driving 
simulator and 6 had some experience using a HUD. 
Apparatus, Design and Procedure 
The experiment took place in a medium-fidelity, fixed-
based driving simulator located at the University of 
Nottingham. The simulator comprises the front half of a 
2001 right-hand drive Honda Civic car positioned within a 
curved screen setup. A bespoke driving scenario was 
created using STISIM Version 3 software, to replicate a 
57

--- Page 3 ---
 
Figure 1. In-vehicle setup showing HUD, road scene and 
participant wearing ETG 
suburban road scene presenting a challenging navigation 
environment (i.e. many turnings close to one another). The 
road scene was projected onto the curved screen in front of 
participants using an overhead projector. To ensure that the 
display of HUD imagery corresponded with the required 
turnings and remained consistent between participants, a 
video recording of the road scene was used. Participants 
were required to maintain a normal driving position within 
the simulator for the duration of each drive, but were not 
actually in control of the vehicle. Navigation cues were 
created 
using 
Synfig 
Studio 
animation 
software 
independently of the road scene and displayed using a 
Pioneer Carrozzeria Laser ND-HUD1 head-up display unit 
(customised to allow VGA input) affixed in place of the 
driver’s sun visor (see Figure 1). Thus, the information 
presented on the HUD appeared to be superimposed on the 
driving scene. Playback of the driving scenario and HUD 
cues was synchronised by the experimenter. SensoMotoric 
Instruments (SMI) Eye Tracking Glasses (ETG) were used 
to collect binocular gaze data at 30 fps. A digital camcorder 
was unobtrusively located in order to record the driver’s 
behaviour and their route selection. 
Drivers completed the driving scenario using each of four 
presentations of navigational instructions – conventional 
(CV), AR arrows (AR), landmark arrows (LA) and 
landmark boxes (LB) (see Figure 2). The conventional 
(CV) presentation displayed the distance-to-turn (in metres) 
and turn direction (utilising a fixed arrow) on the right or 
left of the HUD display (depending on which direction was 
being indicated). During the AR condition, an augmented 
arrow was displayed in the centre of the road that pointed to 
the required turning and changed dynamically (shortened 
and increased in size) as the car approached the junction. 
Landmarks were highlighted either by using an arrow 
pointing at the landmark (LA) or by using boxes that 
enclosed the landmark (LB). Distance-to-turn information 
was present in all conditions. The HUD elements initially 
appeared 15 seconds before each junction and were 
synchronised with the road scene, thus updating/moving as 
the participant approached the designated junction (e.g. the 
distance-to-turn indicator counted down at increments of 10 
metres, the landmark ‘box’ changed with perspective etc.). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Experimental conditions showing HUD images 
superimposed on road scene (top to bottom: CV, AR, LA, LB) 
The landmarks selected for the LA and LB conditions were 
representative of ‘poor’ landmarks (as defined within the 
aforementioned literature) and as such were neither unique 
nor easily identifiable. These primarily comprised generic, 
nondescript buildings. Both landmark conditions utilised 
the same landmarks, ensuring consistency between 
conditions, but they were encountered in a different order 
and similar landmarks were presented at multiple junctions 
to prevent the participant learning which landmark would 
be highlighted. Throughout the simulated environment, all 
traffic lights remained ‘green’ to avoid influencing driving 
behaviour. 
Drivers progressed along the route at a constant speed of 30 
mph, encountering eight route-decision points. Each of 
these contained eight possible road selections presented in 
close proximity (4 to the right and 4 to the left). Participants 
were asked to use the information presented on the HUD to 
select the ‘correct’ turning. During the LA and LB 
conditions, participants were advised that the correct 
turning would always be immediately in front of the 
highlighted landmark. Each roadway was coloured 
differently (using primary colours) to aid identification. 
58

--- Page 4 ---
Participants indicated their choice by initiating the 
appropriate signalling action (activating right or left 
indicator) and speaking aloud the colour of the road that 
they would follow based on the information provided to 
them. Participants were asked to signal and announce their 
selection as soon as they were confident that they were 
‘correct.’ 
No 
voice 
information 
was 
provided 
as 
navigational cues, to ensure participants were wholly reliant 
on the visual representations.   
Following each drive, participants completed a NASA-TLX 
questionnaire [8] to record the workload they associated 
with each presentation. After completing all four 
conditions, 
participants 
were 
asked 
to 
rank 
each 
presentation (from 1 to 4, with 1 being most preferred and 4 
being least). Drivers only experienced one style of 
navigational cue during each drive and the order of 
presentation was counterbalanced between subjects. Each 
drive took approximately 5 minutes to complete and 
participants wore ETG throughout. The entire study lasted 
approximately 45 minutes. Participants received £10 (GBP) 
as compensation for their time. 
Measures 
The following measures were captured: 
1. Response Time. Defined as the time between the cue 
being displayed on the HUD and the participant indicating 
their choice by activating the appropriate indicator.  
2. Success Rate. Defined as the number of correct road 
selections for the entire route, expressed as a percentage. 
3. Subjective Workload. Captured using the NASA TLX 
questionnaire and reported as a raw cumulative mean value 
determined across all subscales (mental, physical and 
temporal demand, performance, effort and frustration). 
4. Driver 
Preference. 
Captured 
using 
a 
bespoke 
questionnaire completed after all conditions had been 
experienced and presented as a mean ranking. 
5. Eye Glance Behaviour. Captured using SMI ETG. 
Coded by Area of Interest (AOI) and presented as fixation 
intensity (%), heat map visualisations and gaze sequence 
charts. 
6. General 
Comments. 
Captured 
using 
a 
bespoke 
questionnaire at the end of the study and presented, where 
appropriate, within the discussion section. 
RESULTS 
Response Time 
A repeated measures ANOVA, with Greenhouse-Geisser 
correction, revealed a significant difference for the mean 
response times between the four conditions (F(2,44)= 
35.75, 
p<.0001). 
Post 
hoc 
comparisons, 
applying 
Bonferroni 
correction, 
indicated 
that 
participants’ 
navigational decision time was significantly shorter during 
the LB condition (mean 5.01 seconds, at a distance of  
 
 
Figure 3. Mean response time and distance before turning 
133.0m before the turning) compared with LA (5.62s, 
122.4m; p<.05), AR (7.88s, 94.9m; p<.0001) and CV 
presentations (8.81s, 80.5m; p<.0001) (see Figure 3). The 
LA presentation was also significantly faster than AR 
(p<.0001). In addition, participants performed significantly 
slower during CV than in both AR (p<.05) and LA 
(p<.0001). 
Success Rate 
A second ANOVA, with Greenhouse-Geisser correction, 
revealed a significant difference between the success rates 
for each of the four conditions (F(2,34)= 7.07, p < .005). 
The Bonferroni-corrected post hoc tests showed that 
participants achieved a significantly higher success rate 
(mean 7.67 out of 8, 95.8%) while using the LB 
presentation compared to both CV (6.08, 76.0%; p<.001) 
and AR (7.17, 89.6%; p<.001). However, participants were 
no more successful using LB than LA (7.42, 92.7%; 
p=.086). Similarly, there were no significant differences in 
success rates between the two non-landmark conditions, CV 
and AR (p=.114) (see Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4. Success rate with standard error bars 
59

--- Page 5 ---
Figure 5. Mean workload ratings (raw-TLX) with standard 
error bars 
Figure 6. Drivers’ preference ratings 
Subjective Workload 
A repeated measures ANOVA test revealed significant 
differences between workload ratings (raw-TLX score) 
(F(3,57)=4.671, p=.005), with participants rating the CV 
presentation as most demanding (mean score: 7.64). 
Ratings for AR, LA and LB were not significantly different 
from each other (5.88, 5.96 and 5.32, respectively) (see 
Figure 5). It is also noteworthy that, on average, 
participants felt that they performed better (revealed by the 
NASA-TLX ‘performance’ subscale ratings) during the AR 
presentation compared to LA, despite objective results 
showing the opposite effect for both response time and 
success rate. 
Area Of Interest (AOI) 
Distance- 
to-turn 
Road 
Arrow 
Land-
mark 
CV 
14.0 
26.6 
NA 
NA 
AR 
8.8 
12.7 
17.5 
NA 
LA 
2.1 
7.1 
5.0 
11.2 
LB 
1.2 
13.8 
NA 
10.2 
Table 1. Gaze fixation times (% of total time cues presented). 
Driver Preference 
A Friedman test revealed statistically significant differences 
between participants’ preference rankings (χ2(3)=8.88, 
p=.031). The LB presentation was most preferred (mean 
ranking, 1.9) with CV being least preferred (ranking: 3.1). 
Additionally, AR tended to be more preferred than LA, 
with mean rankings of 2.4 and 2.6 respectively. Post hoc 
Wilcoxon Signed Ranks tests 
indicated 
significant 
differences between LB and CV (p<.01) and LA (p<.05) 
only. Mean preference rankings for AR were less 
perspicuous as this configuration divided opinion – 7 
participants ranked this as their most preferred (‘1’), while 
6 indicated that this was their least preferred presentation 
(‘4’) – and this had opposing effects on the mean value (see 
Figure 6). 
Eye Glance Behaviour 
Eye-tracking data were analysed from the time at which the 
navigation cue was displayed to when the participant 
indicated their response. Data recorded after each response 
were not included during the analysis as there was no direct 
driving involved in the task, meaning that participants were 
not required to maintain attention. Eye glance fixations 
were coded based on different areas of interest (AOI) for 
each presentation. These were: distance-to-turn countdown 
and the side-road turning itself (for all presentations). 
Additionally, the following AOIs were coded (where 
applicable): AR arrow (for AR), landmark (for LA and LB) 
and landmark arrow (for LA). 
Figure 7. Sequence chart visualisation of eye glance data (participant 20). 
60

--- Page 6 ---
 
Figure 8. ‘Heat map’ visualisations of eye glance behaviour 
Gaze fixation time, defined as the total time that 
participants’ visual attention was directed towards elements 
presented on the HUD (expressed as a percentage of the 
total time (120 seconds) that each cue was presented), was 
calculated for each condition (see Table 1). The ‘distance-
to-turn’ cue received the highest proportion of participants’ 
visual attention during CV and AR (14.0% and 8.8% 
respectively), compared to 2.1% for LA and 1.2% for LB, 
indicating less reliance on the conventional cue during the 
‘landmark’ presentations. These data also highlight that the 
total time looking at the navigational cues is significantly 
lower during the two landmark conditions (LA, 30.2s; LB, 
30.5s) compared with the CV (48.7s) and AR (46.8s). 
The sequence chart (Figure 7) shows typical visual 
strategies employed during each of the presentations. Heat 
maps were also generated to visualise the frequency that 
participants attended to each AOI (see Figure 8). The size 
and colours represent the intensity of fixations, with larger, 
redder areas indicating high fixation intensity and smaller, 
greener dots indicating fewer fixations. It is evident from 
the sequence charts that participant 20 viewed the distance-
to-turn information frequently when using the CV and AR 
presentations. However, this information was attended to 
less during the landmark presentations. For example, during 
the LB condition, distance-to-turn information was sampled 
at the start of each navigational decision point but not used 
again until the next decision point. It is also noteworthy that 
the road itself was attended to least during the LA 
presentation.  
DISCUSSION 
The main aim of the study was to compare different formats 
of navigation advice presented on a HUD, with particular 
focus on AR enhancement of landmarks. In line with 
similar comparative studies conducted using HDD (e.g. 
[10]), landmark-based navigation resulted in significant 
improvements in performance, revealed by reduced 
decision times and enhanced success rates, compared with 
conventional distance-to-turn approaches. Furthermore, 
both landmark presentations resulted in significantly lower 
response times compared with the distance-to-turn and 
more common AR presentations, such as arrows overlaid 
on the road scene. The reduction in response time indicates 
that participants were able to distinguish which landmark 
was being highlighted and determine the ‘correct’ turning 
more quickly than when provided with distance-to-turn or 
roadway arrows (approximately 50 metres sooner). 
In addition to quicker mean response times, the success rate 
for the landmark-based conditions was also significantly 
higher, on average, than the more conventional methods. It 
is suggested that this is due to there being less ambiguity 
when using landmarks, i.e. once the landmark has been 
identified, it is ‘known’ and drivers simply select the 
corresponding roadway. Furthermore, drivers are more 
likely to remain confident that their choice of turning is 
correct, as the landmark remains unchanged. In contrast, 
drivers appeared to be less able to identify which turning 
was highlighted by the CV and AR presentations, and 
therefore either delayed these decisions or selected the 
incorrect turning. 
A major concern when using landmark-based navigation is 
the quality and availability of landmarks during normal 
driving 
[5]. 
By 
conducting 
the 
experiment 
using 
traditionally ‘poor’, nondescript landmarks, the study also 
demonstrated the feasibility of elevating the status of 
unremarkable landmarks, and promoting their utility as 
effective navigational cues. Furthermore, it was evident that 
there was no requirement to name or identify the 
purpose/function of the landmark in order to promote its 
status – physically highlighting the landmark by using an 
arrow or box appears to be sufficient to enhance its utility. 
In contrast, other landmark-based navigation paradigms 
61

--- Page 7 ---
require clear descriptors to allow users to identify 
landmarks correctly (e.g. the name of a public house). 
Results from the current study suggest that any building, 
object or feature could be utilised for navigational purposes, 
provided it can be highlighted on the HUD and persists in 
the driver’s field of view, suggesting that there are 
significant benefits to this navigational approach. However, 
it is unclear from the current data whether participants were 
actually attending to the landmark, or were solely fixated on 
the box enclosing it (or a combination both). This has clear 
implications for the design/acceptance of such a system. 
It is also noteworthy from the eye-tracking data that drivers 
relied less on the conventional distance-to-turn cues when 
following the AR landmark-based navigation approaches, 
compared to AR arrows. This suggests that once 
participants had identified the ‘correct’ landmark, they 
remained confident with their selection, and displayed no 
tendency to interrogate the distance-to-turn cue to 
confirm/re-affirm their choice. Such a strategy is 
highlighted in the sequence map (Figure 7). When using 
either the CV or AR presentations, participant 20 alternated 
their fixations between the physical turning and the 
distance-to-turn cue, suggesting constant checking/re-
affirming. However, while using the LB, the participant 
made a brief glance to the distance-to-turn at the start of 
each manoeuvre but thereafter very few, if any, 
confirmation checks were made, suggesting much higher 
confidence in route selection.  
It is also evident from the NASA TLX ratings that using the 
LB approach to highlight the required turning significantly 
reduced drivers’ perceived workload compared to the more 
conventional AR approaches. This is likely to have been 
influenced by a number of factors. For example, drivers 
were not required to estimate distances when using 
landmark presentations, thus reducing their cognitive/visual 
effort. Consequently, the NASA-TLX scores for the 
landmark conditions were relatively low, suggesting that 
this style of presentation is likely to impose reduced 
workload, allowing drivers to maintain their attention on 
the primary driving task. 
Participants’ preference ratings revealed that the least 
preferred presentation was the conventional distance-to-turn 
information. This is likely to be due to the fact that many 
participants found it difficult to judge distances accurately 
(highlighted by higher workload ratings and comments 
recorded on the feedback form) and thus found it difficult to 
identify the correct turning, particularly given that there 
were several possible roads in close proximity; this is 
supported by the objective data. 
There were mixed responses to the AR presentation with 
many participants scoring this either as most or least 
preferred. Participant 6, who ranked AR as ‘least preferred’, 
commented that, “it was difficult to concentrate on two 
changing arrows simultaneously”. Others, who ranked this 
presentation more highly, stated that the (road) arrow was 
“quick” and “easy to read.” Nevertheless, none of the 
participants who ranked AR as ‘most preferred’ performed 
best using this presentation, suggesting that, although the 
information was ‘quick’ and ‘easy’ to understand, this did 
not necessarily translate to enhanced performance. This 
may be because there was no performance feedback – 
participants did not know if they had selected the correct 
turning and may therefore believe that they had selected 
correctly, even if they had not. Another possible 
explanation is that this presentation was most comparable in 
design to existing navigation systems and thus participants 
were responding to ‘familiarity’ or expectations. This may 
also have contributed to some of the positive responses to 
the CV presentation. 
When considering the two landmark conditions, it was 
evident that there was a strong preference towards using a 
box to identify the landmark rather than an arrow to 
highlight it. Participants’ comments suggested that this was 
because it was more difficult to identify to which landmark 
the arrow pointed (there was also a high concentration of 
buildings/other landmarks in the scenario). The arrow 
provided limited depth perception cues making it difficult 
to judge distance. Distance/depth perception is notoriously 
difficult to determine within a simulated environment, due 
to the monoscopic two-dimensional projection of the three-
dimensional world. In the current study, using a box to 
identify the landmark is effective even with poor depth 
perception – the box assumed and maintained the same 
approximate proportions as the landmark being represented 
and thus there was little ambiguity or confusion identifying 
the landmark and hence the correct turning. Indeed, there 
were notably very few errors and responses times were 
quickest using this presentation (identification was, “clear, 
even in the distance”). In a commercialised product with a 
wider field of view, one might conceive that the ‘box’ 
would assume an exact outline of the chosen landmark, thus 
making identification even easier.  
Some participants also highlighted the desire/necessity of 
maintaining the conventional distance-to-turn information 
(“the distance was extremely useful in all conditions, 
especially for confirming selection”) even with the more 
‘novel’ presentations. Indeed, there was evidence from the 
sequence 
maps 
that, 
even 
during 
the 
landmark 
presentations, some participants made their selection using 
the landmark cue and then confirmed that this was correct 
by interrogating the distance-to-turn information repeatedly 
until the road had been reached. 
There was little evidence to suggest that drivers were 
distracted by any of the HUD imagery during the study or 
that 
they 
allocated 
their 
attention 
inappropriately. 
Furthermore, there was no evidence of poorer performance 
due to inattention on the primary task when using the HUD, 
as observed by [7], although it is recognised that no 
baseline comparisons were made using a traditional ‘heads-
down’ display during the study. Two participants 
62

--- Page 8 ---
commented that they felt distracted when using the 
landmark ‘box’ presentation (“focus was directed to the box 
instead of the turning”). However, although participants 
were seated in a car and were required to adopt a driving 
position throughout the study, they were not actually in 
control of the vehicle. Further work should investigate the 
specific implications of these displays on the driving task. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The study investigated different augmented reality 
presentations of navigational information using a HUD. 
Results revealed strong preferences and navigational 
performance benefits (in terms of speed of response and 
accuracy) 
when 
using 
AR landmark 
presentations, 
compared to other, more traditional presentations. Particular 
benefits were associated with using a ‘box’ to highlight a 
landmark located at the required intersection (with 
improvements of 43.1% and 26.2% for response time and 
success rate, respectively); this was also the most preferred 
presentation and attracted the lowest ratings of workload. 
The study also revealed that the usability and utility of 
landmarks, that were previously assumed to be ‘poor’ 
navigational candidates, could be enhanced by highlighting 
them using AR. Furthermore, there was no requirement to 
use descriptors to identify these landmarks, suggesting that 
any building, object or feature that persists in the driver’s 
(HUD) field of view could be used to support route-finding, 
The inclusion of additional distance-to-turn information 
would allow drivers to confirm their decisions, if required. 
We conclude that there are significant benefits to this 
navigational approach. In future work, care should be taken 
to minimise the distraction effects of presenting additional 
information to drivers and to avoid information ‘clutter’. 
Further work should also consider the effects on driving 
and consider the impact of improved depth perception in a 
real world, rather than simulated environment. 
REFERENCES 
1. Ablaβmeier, M., McGlaun, G., Rigoll, G. (2005)
“Evaluating the Potential of Head-Up Displays for a
Multimodal Interaction Concept in the Automotive
Environment.” Proceedings of the WMSCI
2. Ablaβmeier, M., et al. (2007) “Eye Gaze Studies
Comparing Head-Up and Head-Down Displays in
Vehicles.” 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on
Multimedia and Expo. 2250-2252.
3. BMW. (2014) BMW Head-Up Display. Available:
http://www.bmw.com/com/en/insights/technology/techn
ology_guide/articles/head_up_display.html. 
Accessed
2nd Dec 2014.
4. Burnett, G. (2000) “‘Turn right at the Traffic Lights’ 
The Requirement for Landmarks in Vehicle Navigation
Systems.” The Journal of Navigation. Vol.53 p499-510.
5. Burnett, G., Smith, D., May, A. (2001) “Supporting the
Navigation Task: Characteristics of 'Good' Landmarks.”
Contemporary Ergonomics. p441-446.
6. Goodman, J., Gray, P., Khammampad, K. Brewster, S.
(2004) “Using Landmarks to Support Older People in
Navigation.” Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Vol.3160 p38-48.
7. Haines, R. F., Price, T. A., (1980) “Cognitive Issues in
Head-Up Displays” NASA Technical Paper.
8. Hart, S. G., Staveland, L. E. (1988). Development of
NASA-TLX: Results of empirical and theoretical
research. Advances in psychology, 52, 139-183.
9. Kim, S., Dey, A. (2009) “Simulated Augmented Reality
Windshield Display as a Cognitive Mapping Aid for
Elder Driver Navigation.” Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
p133-142.
10. May, A., Ross. (2006) “Presence and Quality of
Navigational Landmarks: Effect on Driver Performance
and Implications for Design.” Human Factors: The
Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society.
Vol.48 p346-361.
11. Medenica, Z., Kun, A. L., Paek, T., Palinko, O. (2011)
“Augmented Reality vs Street Views: A Driving
Simulator Study Comparing Two Emerging Navigation
Aids.” Proceedings of the 13th International Conference
on HCI with Mobile Devices and Services. p265-274.
12. Nwakacha, V., Crabtree, A., Burnett, G. (2013).
Evaluating Distraction and Disengagement of Attention
from the Road. In Virtual, Augmented and Mixed
Reality. Systems and Applications (pp. 261-270).
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
13. Phillips, B. (1999) “The Role of Landmark Information
in Intelligent Navigation Displays.” Proceedings of the
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual
Meeting. Vol.43 p972-976.
14. Sojourner, R. J., Antin, J. F. (1990) “The Effects of a
Simulated Head-Up Display Speedometer on Perceptual
Task Performance.” Human Factors: The Journal of the
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society. Vol 32. p329-
339.
15. Victor, T. W., Harbluk, J. L., Engström, J. A. (2005)
“Sensitivity of Eye-Movement Measures to In-Vehicle
Task Difficulty” Transportation Research Part F: Traffic
Psychology and Behaviour, 8. p167-190.
16. Yeh, M., Wickens, C. D., Merlo, J. L., Brandenburg, D.
L. (2001) “Effects of Precision on Cue Effectiveness
and Display Signalling.” Proceedings of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting. Vol
45. p1886-1890.
63
