--- Page 1 ---
Philipp Wintersberger*
Center of Automotive Research on
Integrated Safety Systems and
Measurement Area (CARISSMA)
Technische Hochschule Ingolstadt
(THI)
and
Johannes Kepler University Linz
Anna-Katharina Frison
Andreas Riener
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science
Technische Hochschule Ingolstadt
(THI)
and
Johannes Kepler University Linz
Tamara von Sawitzky
Center of Automotive Research on
Integrated Safety Systems and
Measurement Area (CARISSMA)
Technische Hochschule Ingolstadt
(THI)
and
Johannes Kepler University Linz
Presence, Vol. 27, No. 1, Winter 2018, 46–62
doi:10.1162/PRES_a_00320
© 2019 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Fostering User Acceptance and
Trust in Fully Automated
Vehicles: Evaluating the Potential
of Augmented Reality
Abstract
Lack of trust in or acceptance of technology are some of the fundamental problems
that might prevent the dissemination of automated driving. Technological advances,
such as augmented reality aids like full-sized windshield displays or AR contact lenses,
could be of help to provide a better system understanding to the user. In this work,
we picked up on the question of whether augmented reality assistance has the po-
tential to increase user acceptance and trust by communicating system decisions (i.e.,
transparent system behavior). To prove our hypothesis, we conducted two driving sim-
ulator studies to investigate the benefit of scenario augmentation in fully automated
driving—first in normal (N = 26) and then in rearward viewing (N = 18) direction.
Quantitative results indicate that the augmentation of traffic objects/participants oth-
erwise invisible (e.g., due to dense fog), or the presentation of upcoming driving ma-
neuvers while sitting backwards, is a feasible approach to increase user acceptance
and trust. Results are further backed by qualitative findings from semistructured inter-
views and UX curves (a method to retrospectively report experience over time). We
conclude that the application of augmented reality, in particular with the emergence
of more powerful, lightweight, or integrated devices, is a good opportunity with high
potential for automated driving.
1
Introduction
Automated driving systems (ADS) and cooperative, intelligent, trans-
portation systems (C-ITS) promise to revolutionize mobility as we are used to,
and visions of tomorrow’s traffic do not have much in common with the reality
present on our roads today. Inspired by network and control theory (Parent,
2007), decreased travel time and maximized throughput while eliminating
headways, traffic lights, or signs (Au, Zhang, & Stone, 2015) are promised.
Finally, also the fixed assigned directions of lanes will be abandoned (Riener
& Ferscha, 2013). System performance, usually demonstrated in theory or by
traffic simulation, depicts a nearly perfect image of a future without conges-
tions, pollution, or accidents. However, although it is clear that the path to-
wards this future depends on technological, societal, and legal transformations
(Litman, 2014), crucial hurdles will emerge from human factors. Exploiting the
full benefits of ADSs and C-ITSs demands a high (or even full) penetration of
*Correspondence to Philipp.Wintersberger@carissma.eu.
46
PRESENCE: VOLUME 27, NUMBER 1

--- Page 2 ---
Wintersberger et al.
47
automated vehicles (Au, Zhang, & Stone, 2015), so hu-
man users must accept and trust safety-critical systems as
they proverbially put their lives in the hands of comput-
ers (Wintersberger & Riener, 2016).
1.1 Trust Issues in Automated Driving
As of today, many people express skepticism to-
wards the concept of automated driving. Reasons in-
clude loss of control (Kyriakidis, Happee, & de Winter,
2014), reduced pleasure (Frison, Wintersberger, Riener,
& Schartmüller, 2017), but also lack of trust (Winters-
berger, Frison, & Riener, 2016). Since fully automated
level-5 vehicles (SAE, 2014) have not yet been devel-
oped, studies on trust in automated vehicles (AVs) either
address lower levels of automation (Helldin, Falkman,
Riveiro, & Davidsson, 2013), are purely survey-based
(Rödel, Stadler, Meschtscherjakov, & Tscheligi, 2014),
or just put automated vehicles in today’s traffic scenar-
ios (Lee, Kim et al., 2016). However, reality will be
more complex: A wide penetration of fully automated
vehicles is not expected before 2050 (Bansal & Kock-
elman, 2017). Therefore, we should consider accom-
panying developments and technical advances to inves-
tigate trust in fully automated driving. To accept and
trust level-5 vehicles as part of fully automated C-ITSs
means more than just believing that a computer can op-
erate a vehicle as good as a human driver. It will mean
to trust traffic systems that have superhuman (Sieg-
wart, Nourbakhsh, & Scaramuzza, 2011) capabilities
(such as being able to operate on environmental infor-
mation beyond the line of sight, maintain ultimately
short headways, etc.) emerging from advances in com-
munication, cooperation, or artificial intelligence. To
increase user trust (and deal with distrust), a promising
approach is to present why-and-how information (Koo
et al., 2015), and make system decisions transparent to
the user—a method that can take advantage of head-
up-displays (HUD) or augmented reality (AR) tech-
niques (Haeuslschmid, Von Buelow, Pfleging, & Butz,
2017).
The great potential of AR applications has already
been shown in the context of manual driving, where the
presentation of information in the driver’s line of sight
can diminish distraction and improve driving perfor-
mance (Smith, Streeter, Burnett, & Gabbard, 2015).
Recent work shows examples of superimposing sen-
sor information, such as radar-vision for improved for-
ward collision warnings (Park, Lee, Yoon, & Kyong-
Ho, 2015), displaying warning information (Hosseini,
Bacara, & Linkamp, 2014), enhancing night vision for
drivers (Hu, Zhau, & Li, 2015), or augmenting the
brake way of vehicles to prevent crashes (Tangmanee
& Teeravanrunyou, 2012). AR-HUDs currently are
still facing problems like change blindness (Rensink,
O’Regan, & Clark, 1997) or limited interaction space
and field of view. However, future technologies such as
optical see-through light-field displays (Lee, Changwon
et al., 2016) could eliminate these issues, finally allowing
“windshield displays” (WSDs, AR-HUDs that cover the
entire windshield), AR glasses with a small form factor,
or even AR contact lenses (Perlin, 2016).
1.2 Approach
The aim of our work is to demonstrate the ap-
plicability of AR for fostering trust and acceptance
in fully automated driving under consideration of
technological advances in both display and C-ITS tech-
nologies. For the context of our studies, we define ac-
ceptance according to the technology acceptance model
(TAM) as a user’s intention to actually use a given sys-
tem, determined by his/her “overall attitude towards
using [it]” (Davis, 1993, p. 475). We further argue
that trust, the “attitude that an agent will achieve an
individual’s goals in a situation characterized by uncer-
tainty and vulnerability” (Lee & See, 2004, p. 51), is
an important determinant for acceptance of safety crit-
ical systems, such as automated vehicles. To prove our
hypotheses, we conducted two driving simulator stud-
ies addressing potential level-5 driving scenarios (see
Figure 1).
The first experiment evaluates whether augmenting
other traffic objects, which are relevant for maneuver
decisions, can foster trust in AVs with superhuman ca-
pabilities. More precisely, participants faced a trip in an
automated vehicle that, due to advances in sensor fusion
and C2X communication, is able to drive through dense

--- Page 3 ---
48
PRESENCE: VOLUME 27, NUMBER 1
Figure 1. Overview of the two experiments presented in this article. Passengers of a fully automated vehicle were presented augmented reality
aids (in both normal and rearward facing directions) to increase trust and acceptance.
fog faster than the direct line of sight in manual driv-
ing would allow. To increase user trust, we simulated an
artificial full-sized windshield display that can augment
any object outside the vehicle.
In the second experiment, participants were sitting
on a rotated seat, facing against the driving direction.
Vehicle manufacturers (e.g., the Mercedes Benz F015
concept car) have already presented similar concepts.
To communicate system decisions, participants were
presented upcoming maneuvers on a head-mounted
display (Microsoft HoloLens) that could be substi-
tuted in the future by enhanced AR glasses or contact
lenses.
Both experiments are unique in a way that they holis-
tically address the potential of AR to foster trust in and
acceptance of future automated driving concepts. AR
thereby shows advantages compared to classical in-
vehicle displays: It provides the opportunity to high-
light objects directly in the environment (what we call
“implicit communication of system decisions”; see Sec-
tion 3), head-mounted displays (HMDs) further allow
perceiving visual feedback regardless of the head/body
pose.
The rest of the article is structured as follows: In Sec-
tion 2, we present relevant groundwork addressing user
acceptance and trust, discuss them along the levels of
automation, and highlight future C-ITS scenarios. In
Section 3, we present the underlying concept shared
by both of our experiments, while in Sections 4 and 5
the studies are introduced in detail. We conclude with a
comprehensive discussion about our results and present
an outlook.
2
Acceptance of and Trust in Automated
Vehicle Technology
User acceptance is one of the critical factors deter-
mining whether or not information systems succeed
or fail (Davis, 1993). Especially the success of auto-
mated driving is strongly dependent on a widespread
acceptance in society. Davis (1993) postulated the Tech-
nology Acceptance Model (TAM), which is based on
the Psychological Attitude Paradigm (Ajzen & Fish-
bein, 1975), linking between users’ beliefs, attitudes,
and behaviors. Here, the perceived usefulness (PU)
and ease of use (PEOU) of an external stimuli (or de-
sign feature) influence the general attitude towards us-
ing a system (ATT, affective response), which in turn
leads to use or disuse (Intent, behavioral response).
Over the years, TAM was extended with additional at-
tributes, leading to TAM 2 (Venkatesh & Davis, 2000)
and TAM 3 (Venkatesh, Morris, Davis, & Davis, 2003).
Belanche, Casalo, and Carlos (2012) added another fac-
tor to the TAM: trust. By including uncertainty and vul-
nerability, they postulate a research model addressing
the causality between trust, perceived usefulness, ease
of use, attitude, and intention to use a system. Their

--- Page 4 ---
Wintersberger et al.
49
studies revealed that both attitude and intention to
use significantly connect to trust, and thus they added
trust as a third belief “able to explain the mechanisms”
(Belanche, Casalo, & Carlos, 2012, p. 199) to the TAM
framework.
Trust is a multidimensional construct built by analytic,
analogical and affective processes (Lee & See, 2004).
Marsh and Dibben (2003) categorized trust into three
different layers: dispositional trust, representing some-
one’s general trust in automation (influenced by culture,
gender, personality, etc.); situational trust, depending
on context and interaction with the automation; and
learned trust, which emerges from working with the
system for a certain period. Hoff and Bashir (2015) fur-
ther divided learned trust into initial learned trust (given
by understanding, attitudes, or brand reputation) and
dynamic learned trust (depending on a system’s perfor-
mance and reliability). Ekman, Johansson, and Sochor
(2016, p. 4) summarized the three main components of
trust: “trust is built on the possibility to observe the sys-
tem’s behavior (performance), understand the intended
use of the system (purpose), as well as understand how
it makes decisions (process).” They further identified 11
key factors that affect trust: feedback, error information,
uncertainty information, why-and-how information,
training, common goals, adaptive information, anthro-
pomorphism, customization, expert/reputable, and
mental models.
However, it is not enough to trust and use AVs—to
responsibly operate safety critical systems, one must
trust them appropriately and use them properly. Trust
research thereby provides principles for safe operation
by introducing the terms use, disuse, and misuse (Para-
suraman & Riley, 1997). While use reflects proper in-
teraction, misuse stands for use under wrong circum-
stances, and disuse finally means not using the automa-
tion at all. Both disuse and misuse can be the result of
trust issues (distrust and, respectively, overtrust) and
automated systems should aim to foster use and pre-
vent disuse/misuse. This process, also called “calibra-
tion of trust” (Muir, 1987, p. 535), should eliminate
wrongly calibrated trust by education and retraining. In
the following, we discuss trust issues in automated driv-
ing along the six levels of automation as introduced by
SAE (2014).
2.1 Human Driver Monitors the Driving
Environment (Levels 0–2)
Both distrust and overtrust can be relevant bar-
riers for the success of automated vehicle technology;
however, we expect changing priorities with increasing
levels of automation. Dickie and Boyle (2009) showed
that many users of adaptive cruise control (ACC) face
overtrust and use these systems in circumstances they
were not designed for (e.g., road with high curvature,
etc.). Further on, the first known fatality in automated
driving (Tesla Accident, May 2016) is suspected to be
a result of overtrust. This presumption indicates that
overtrust is a crucial problem for automated vehicles
upon level-3—as long as the human is responsible for
monitoring, systems must deal with misuse emerg-
ing from overtrust or limited knowledge about system
boundaries.
2.2 ADS Monitors the Driving
Environment (Levels 3–5)
In higher levels of automation, overtrust will be-
come less safety critical since the vehicle itself will be able
to reach the minimal risk condition. Still, a special case
is level-3 (conditional automation), where the driver is
not required to monitor the vehicle but must be able
to take over control on short notice. Here, appropri-
ately calibrated trust will be a key issue to guarantee a
safe collaboration between the driver and the vehicle, as
overtrust could lead to delayed reactions (Helldin, Falk-
man, Riveiro, & Davidsson, 2013). As soon as sophisti-
cated fully automated driving systems become available,
distrust will become the more important trust issue.
According to recent publications, level-4 capabilities
are expected to be implemented in 24.8% (pessimistic
guess) to 87.2% (optimistic guess) of all vehicles in 2045
(Bansal & Kockelman, 2017) at the earliest. At the latest
when large numbers of level-5 vehicles are penetrat-
ing the markets, users must quickly be convinced of the

--- Page 5 ---
50
PRESENCE: VOLUME 27, NUMBER 1
Figure 2. Driving simulator used to carry out the presented studies (left). Study 1 (middle) addresses superhuman driving in foggy environments.
In Study 2 (right) we placed participants on the passenger seat, covered the steering wheel and let the vehicle drive backward to create the illusion
of a rotated seat.
technology to exploit the benefit of C-ITS systems and
trust them in various potentially ambiguous situations,
such as:
2.2.1 Platooning. Multiple vehicles build up a pla-
toon to reduce fuel consumption and increase through-
put (Kamali, Dennis, McAree, Fisher, & Veres, 2017),
and thus the headway to the preceding vehicle is much
smaller than what can be called “safe” in manual driving.
2.2.2 Dynamic Lane Reversal. To maximize through-
put, driving lanes can be dynamically assigned to differ-
ent directions by C-ITS (Riener & Ferscha, 2013). Such
dynamic adaptations could be perceived as dangerous
and must be properly communicated to the user.
2.2.3 Intersection Management. Traditional traffic
lights might disappear at future intersections that dy-
namically open corridors to vehicles. Such junctions are
characterized by small gaps, multiple open directions,
and speeds higher than in manual driving (Au, Zhang, &
Stone, 2015).
2.2.4 Superhuman Driving. Due to the possibili-
ties emerging from cooperative sensing (Hobert et al.,
2015), vehicles can see parts of the environment that are
invisible to human eyes. Thus, they could drive faster or
overtake other vehicles in ambiguous situations (foggy
environments, etc.).
2.2.5 Rotated Vehicle Seats. As the need for the
driver to monitor the environment vanishes, rotating
seats will allow to face backwards to interact with other
occupants in a comfortable environment, or effectively
work in office-like settings (Diels & Bos, 2016). How-
ever, drivers must trust the vehicle to behave correctly, as
they have no longer a chance for quick intervention.
3
Concept and Research Questions
We conducted two user studies in a high-fidelity
driving simulator (hexapod moving platform) addressing
potentially ambiguous future automated driving con-
cepts (see Figure 2).
In the first study, participants had to ride in a fully
automated vehicle that performs multiple overtaking
maneuvers in dense fog (superhuman driving). In the
second experiment, participants were sitting on a ro-
tated seat, facing backwards (backward driving). Thus,
in both scenarios, important parts of the environment
were invisible for participants, and we aimed for creat-
ing augmented reality aids that communicate system
decisions, increase transparency, and let users anticipate
upcoming driving maneuvers. Therefore, we designed a
visualization strategy for each scenario and thereby dis-
tinguish between implicit and explicit communication of
system decisions.
Traffic Augmentation. In contrast to already known
methods for presenting why-and-how information that

--- Page 6 ---
Wintersberger et al.
51
explicitly explain vehicle behavior, we decided to just
augment sensor data and highlight objects in the scene
that are relevant for maneuver decisions. We call this
method “implicit communication of system decisions,”
as the actual system output (maneuver) is not presented
to users, but they can “see what the vehicle sees” and
thus anticipate upcoming actions. The justification,
therefore, is that driving consists of plenty of maneu-
vers that can be initiated by arbitrary reasons—designing
display information capable of explaining all these vari-
ations might be hard to achieve and could further over-
whelm users. Augmenting relevant objects, on the other
hand, is possible with a few symbols, while we believe
most users can predict the vehicle’s behavior based on
knowledge about the objects most relevant for a deci-
sion. To present the augmentation, we used an addi-
tional layer in the driving simulation software represent-
ing a full-size windshield display.
Maneuver Augmentation. In the backward driving
scenario, augmenting objects directly in the environ-
ment makes no sense because of two reasons: first, due
to the facing direction, the user can only see objects that
have already been passed. Second, rotating the driver’s
seat will usually happen to engage in other tasks, such
as communicating with other occupants, working, etc.,
and thus the driver will not permanently be able to ob-
serve the environment through the rear window or an
in-vehicle display. Consequently, we chose to present
upcoming maneuvers (or more precisely: turns, stops,
overtaking, etc.; see Figure 4) in form of indicators on
a head-mounted display. We call this method “explicit
communication,” as here system decisions are directly
presented to users. For our experiment, we used the Mi-
crosoft HoloLens device.
Currently, it is not fully clear whether or not peo-
ple will adopt AR glasses/contact lenses, but research
highlights the importance of presenting useful con-
cepts to ease adoption by potential customers (Koelle,
Ali, Cobus, V., & Boll, 2017; Kalantari & Rauschnabel,
2018). We argue that our setting highlights such an ad-
vantage: in contrast to visualizations on an in-vehicle
display, users can perceive visualizations in their periph-
eral vision, regardless of their head and body position
during arbitrary secondary activities.
Figure 3. Trust integration in TAM, adapted from Belanche, Casalo,
and Carlos (2012).
3.1 Measurements
To quantify the impact of the presented
AR visualizations on user acceptance and trust at
the subjective level, we used the TAM model with
trust integration (see Figure 3) as proposed by Be-
lanche, Casalo, and Carlos (2012). Additionally, we
adapted the “Trust in Automation Questionnaire”
that was used by Moeckli et al. (2015, p. 115) for the
evaluation of adaptive cruise control. We removed
four items that we believed to be not relevant for our
experiment. Two questions were removed as they ad-
dress manual intervention and interactions (as partici-
pants in our experiments were just passive observers),
one question considering trust development in dif-
ferent circumstances, and another two questions have
been merged into a single one (as we did not differ
between subsystems and wanted to evaluate the AV
as a whole). The resulting questionnaire consisting of
eight items is further on referred to as the “trust scale”
(TS).
3.2 Research Question
By statistically evaluating the results of the subjec-
tive measurements addressing user acceptance and trust
as described above in both user studies, we wanted to
investigate our main research question:
RQ: Are augmented reality aids eligible to increase
user acceptance and trust (in automated driving)
by displaying the relevant information about envi-
ronment (implicit communication) and behavior
(explicit communication)?

--- Page 7 ---
52
PRESENCE: VOLUME 27, NUMBER 1
Figure 4. Condition A utilizing augmentation of important traffic objects in the environment (left), and condition B (no augmentation, right).
Figure 5. Color coding concepts for oncoming (left) and preceding vehicles (right).
4
Study 1:Traffic Augmentation in
Superhuman Driving
In the first study, we evaluated the effect of aug-
mented reality aids presented on a windshield display on
trust in ambiguous driving scenarios. Participants were
instructed to perform a trip with a fully automated vehi-
cle on a straight rural road in dense fog (line of sight ap-
proximately 25 m). We argued that the vehicle can take
advantage of future Lidar/Radar sensors, while getting
information from the cars ahead via cooperative sensing
(Hobert et al., 2015), and thus it can drive with a much
higher speed than the situation would allow in manual
driving. To provoke additional trust issues, the vehicle
performed multiple overtaking maneuvers, where par-
ticipants could not see whether overtaking was safely
possible or not, as oncoming traffic was hidden by fog.
Participants faced two conditions—they experienced the
scenario once with augmentation (A), and once without
any aids (B) in a between-subjects design (see Figure 4).
By statistical investigation of the employed measures, we
investigated the following hypothesis:
H1.i: Augmenting sensory data by highlighting traffic
objects on a windshield display significantly increases
user acceptance and trust in automated driving systems.
4.1 Interaction Concept and
Implementation
We used bounding boxes to highlight other, due
to fog temporary invisible (preceding and oncoming)
vehicles in the scene. A triangle pointing downwards was
used to highlight oncoming vehicles, a triangle pointing
upwards preceding vehicles.
To encode additional information we implemented a
color coding concept (see Figure 5): Oncoming vehicles
were highlighted in green as long as the distance remain-
ing allows for safe overtaking with a speed difference of
20 km/h without a collision, and red otherwise. Pre-
ceding vehicles used an additional color code inspired by

--- Page 8 ---
Wintersberger et al.
53
Table 1: Overview of the Employed Subscales of TAM and TS Including Cronbach’s α, the Median,
and the Mean (in parenthesis) Rating for the Conditions A (with Augmentation) and B (without
Augmentation)
Variable
Nr. of Items
Cronbach’s α
Mdn (M) Cond. A
Mdn (M) Cond. B
TAM
PU
3
.769
5 (4.22)
4 (3.08)
PEOU
3
.838
5 (5.01)
3 (3.88)
Trust
3
.907
4 (4.23)
3 (3.48)
ATT
3
.798
5 (5.06)
4 (4.18)
Intention
1
–
5 (4.31)
3 (3.38)
TS
TS
8
.901
5 (4.59)
4 (3.86)
(Park, Lee, Yoon, & Kyong-Ho, 2015) with the colors
green, yellow, orange, and red. The different colors used
indicate the danger of a rear-end collision considering
the time-to-collision (TTC) as present in typical For-
ward Collision Warning (FCW) systems (see Figure 4).
The augmented-reality aids were presented on a trans-
parent layer placed above the visual output of the driving
simulation software.
Therefore, we directly rooted the positions of the ve-
hicles in 3D space to a C#-Unity application that was
responsible for showing the bounding boxes in the de-
sired size and color.
4.2 Method
4.2.1 Participants. Twenty-six students and members
of university staff voluntarily participated in the exper-
iment. They were aged between 19 and 35 (11 female,
15 male, Mage = 23.77, SDage = 3.99) and all hold a
valid driver’s license. No participant had to be excluded
because of missing data or simulator sickness.
4.2.2 Procedure. The ego vehicle drove with a speed
of 70 km/h. In every scenario, we placed 8 preceding
and 8 oncoming vehicles with a speed of 50 km/h each.
The ego vehicle thus frequently overtook these vehi-
cles to potentially stress participant’s trust levels. Each
participant experienced both conditions (A, with; B,
without augmentation) in randomized order, and was
further instructed to look out of the window, perceive
the environment and do not engage in side activities. Af-
ter each condition, participants completed TAM and TS
on a tablet computer. Afterwards, we asked participants
to describe their experience in a short semi-structured
interview. In total, every session took about 20 min-
utes (5 minutes for preparation, 5 minutes for each trip
in conditions A and B, and another 5 minutes for the
interview).
4.3 Results
4.3.1 Quantitative Evaluation. TAM and TS results
were collected on a 7-point Likert scale. Before eval-
uation, we confirmed the validity of our results using
Cronbach’s α (see Table 1). The medians of the evalu-
ated TAM subscales (perceived usefulness PU, perceived
ease of use PEOU, attitude towards using ATT, Inten-
tion to use, and Trust of the system) show that condi-
tion A (with augmentation) received better ratings than
condition B in all scales.

--- Page 9 ---
54
PRESENCE: VOLUME 27, NUMBER 1
This effect is also apparent when performing
Wilcoxon test (reported as significant with p < .05).
Perceived usefulness (PU) was significantly higher for
condition A (Mdn = 5) than for B (Mdn = 4, T = 78,
p = .000, r = −.58). Similarly, perceived ease of use
(PEOU) showed a significant difference for condition
A (Mdn = 5) compared to condition B (Mdn = 4, T =
76, p = .000, r = −.60). Also, driving with augmenta-
tion (Mdn = 5) was rated a higher attitude (ATT) than
driving without visual assistance (Mdn = 4, T = 77,
p = .000, r = −.57). Condition A (Mdn = 5) further
received higher values for intention to use the system
(condition B: Mdn = 3, T = 26, p = .001, r = −.63).
Interestingly, Trust was the only TAM subscale with
a median below 5 in condition A (Mdn = 4), what
is, however, still significantly higher than condition B
(Mdn = 3, T = 76, p = .000, r = −.51).
Considering the Trust Scale (TS), condition A
(Mdn = 5) received significantly higher scores than con-
dition B (Mdn = 4, T = 206, p = .000, r = −.52). To
summarize, augmenting relevant traffic objects led to a
statistically significant increase in all investigated scales of
TAM and TS.
4.3.2 Qualitative Evaluation. Participants expressed
their experiences and attitudes towards the system in a
short semi-structured interview after the experiment.
Nearly all participants stated trust issues to be highly
relevant in the presented scenario and reported to have
tense or even anxious feelings during the “blind” over-
taking maneuvers when experiencing the scenario with-
out augmentation (translated from German): “Driving
without highlighting of traffic totally feared me,” or
“due to the fog, you can never know if a vehicle is on-
coming.” As expected, highlighting relevant traffic ob-
jects increased trust and acceptance and further allowed
participants to comprehend the vehicle’s behavior: “In
the driving scenario with additional augmentation of
the surrounding traffic you know if there is a vehicle
or not,” “I was able to see why the car is reacting and
understand its actions.” Still, level-5 driving with all its
consequences (relinquishing full vehicle control to the
car) raised concerns. A participant stated: “indicating
the oncoming and preceding vehicles conveys a feel-
ing of control.” One also suggested that the “reduction
or complete omission of the vehicle’s indication over
time would be reasonable when other drivers or I are
understanding the car’s action (of specific maneuvers)
completely.”
4.4 Discussion
Consideration of TAM and TS results shows that
augmenting traffic objects relevant for a driving scenario
can increase user trust as well as other related acceptance
parameters. This is confirmed by a statistically significant
increase in all investigated subscales. Participants rated
PU, PEOU, ATT, Intention, and Trust of the system
(condition A) higher than in the control condition. In
addition, the results of the TS, composed of eight trust-
influencing factors, confirm the improvement. Subjects
further stated that experiencing the scenario without
augmentation led to anxious feelings or fear, while aug-
mentation helped to comprehend the situation even
when they (due to dense fog) could not see the objects
themselves. It seems that when presenting why-and-how
information, augmenting relevant objects (implicit com-
munication of system decisions) is sufficient to explain
upcoming driving actions as users become familiar with
the consequences and can easily anticipate the vehicle’s
behavior. Consequently, we accept our hypothesis H1.i:
Augmenting sensory data by highlighting traffic objects
on a WSD indeed increases user acceptance and trust in
ADS.
5
Study 2:Maneuver Augmentation in
Backward Driving
The second experiment addressed the concept of
rotated drivers’ seats, which was already presented in
multiple design concepts for automated vehicles. Since
the immediate future of the traffic situation becomes
invisible for the driver/passenger, upcoming turns and
maneuvers cannot be anticipated and the resulting sur-
prise effect might decrease acceptance, comfort and
system trust. To cope with these issues, we presented

--- Page 10 ---
Wintersberger et al.
55
Figure 6. Different visualization methods during a left turn: in condition P (left) upcoming maneuvers were presented as perceived by the user
facing rearwards; in condition L (middle), the arrow showed the actual driving direction of the vehicle. In the baseline condition N (right), no visual aid
was provided.
details about upcoming maneuvers on a HMD (Mi-
crosoft HoloLens). In contrast to the previous experi-
ment, we believe presentation on a WSD not to fulfill
the requirements of the driving situation—users will
not necessarily look outside the rear window (or at an
in-vehicle display) all the time, but we wanted them
to perceive the upcoming maneuvers with any head or
body position. To simulate such a situation, participants
performed a Skype call that was interrupted by search
tasks in an Oxford dictionary. To evaluate how a proper
communication of upcoming maneuvers could look like,
we evaluated two different types of visualization: arrows
pointing in the perceived direction (condition P, arrows
facing downwards) and arrows pointing in the driving
direction (condition L, arrows facing upwards; see Fig-
ure 6 for a more detailed explanation). By comparison
with the baseline condition (N, no visual feedback), we
evaluated the following hypotheses:
H2.i: Presenting upcoming maneuvers significantly
increases user acceptance and trust in automated driving
systems when users sit facing backwards.
H2.ii: When sitting facing backwards, symbols depict-
ing upcoming maneuvers as perceived from the perspec-
tive of the driver/passenger are significantly rated better
than a representation of the real driving direction.
5.1 Interaction Concept and
Implementation
We used different symbols to encode upcom-
ing maneuvers that were presented in the peripheral
region on the top right of the HMD. For our experi-
ment we discriminated between four different symbols
that we believed to be relevant for anticipating the im-
mediate future of the driving situation—indicators for
curves/turns in both directions, one symbol represent-
ing a stop or decrease of speed, and another one to indi-
cate an upcoming overtaking or lane change maneuver.
Upcoming maneuvers were announced 500 ms before
execution to give users enough time to interpret the sce-
nario (Kosinski, 2015).
5.2 Method
5.2.1 Participants. In total 18 participants (6 women,
12 men, Mage = 24.8, SDage = 4.84), all students and
university staff aged between 19 and 41 years, took
part in our experiment. We recruited them via mailing
lists, and all participated voluntarily without compensa-
tion. No participant had to be excluded due to technical
problems or simulator sickness. In total 66% stated to
be technology oriented; only 16% described themselves
as not particularly interested in new technology. Thirty-
eight percent of them liked the idea of possessing an
automated vehicle, while 16% did not—all other partici-
pants did not reveal a preference.
5.2.2 Additional Materials. In addition to the mea-
surements as utilized in both studies, we used the UX
Curve (Kujala, Roto, Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila, &
Sinnelä, 2011) method during the semistructured
interview to evaluate participants’ user acceptance
and trust in the overall system by exploring their user

--- Page 11 ---
56
PRESENCE: VOLUME 27, NUMBER 1
Table 2: Overview of the Employed Subscales of TAM and TS Including Cronbach’s α, the Median Rating, and the Mean (in
Parenthesis) for the Conditions L (Logical Direction), P (Perceived Direction), and N (Baseline)
Variable
Nr. Items
Cronbach’s α
Mdn (M) Cond. P
Mdn (M) Cond. L
Mdn (M) Cond. N
TAM
PU
3
.870
4 (4.21)
3 (3.32)
4 (3.00)
PEOU
3
.793
4 (4.21)
3 (3.37)
3 (2.65)
Trust
3
.937
4 (4.05)
3 (3.21)
3 (2.47)
ATT
3
.922
4 (4.21)
3 (2.22)
4 (3.24)
Intention
1
–
4 (3.84)
3 (2.68)
3 (2.71)
TS
TS
8
.949
5 (4.16)
3 (3.68)
4 (3.08)
experience over time. Participants had to draw a line in a
two-dimensional coordinate system in which the x-axis
represents the timeline of each condition. Positive val-
ues at the y-axis represent a positive experience and vice
versa. The emerging graph represents the experience
over time for a specific condition. Thereby we focused
on the relation between their user experience and trust
in the overall system. Additionally, we utilized the simu-
lator sickness questionnaire (SSQ) proposed by Kennedy
et al. (1993), to evaluate if knowledge about upcoming
maneuvers can reduce the effect of motion sickness.
5.2.3 Procedure. We used a within-subject, full-
factorial design in randomized order. Each participant
had to pass three drives in the simulator, experiencing
each condition. Before entering the simulator, partic-
ipants were equipped with the Microsoft HoloLens.
After a short test of the functionality (correct orienta-
tion of the HMD for a correct field of view), they were
instructed into the scenario (short explanation of the
upcoming condition). During the drive, participants
performed a Skype video call with the experimenter as
additional visual/auditory task. A research assistant con-
ducted the interview and tried to get additional insights
into participants’ views on automated driving. We em-
phasize here, that the interview had no connection to
the experiment itself (augmented reality, trust or rotated
seats) and assessed other questions (such as “do you
think driving in a train is similar to automated driving,”
“do you own a vehicle, and if yes, which one,” etc.).
In addition, participants periodically had to look for
the meaning of specific words in an Oxford dictionary.
Participants could thus not permanently concentrate
on the driving situation (or focus on the environment)
and had to switch between different tasks frequently.
After each driving scenario, participants completed the
questionnaires. At the end of the study, we conducted a
semistructured interview, utilizing the UX curve, which
should help subjects to describe their experience during
all three conditions.
5.3 Results
5.3.1 Quantitative Evaluation. As in study 1, we
used a 7-Point Likert to collect data for TAM and TS.
Again, we can report acceptable values for the internal
reliability of multi-item scales by calculating Cronbach’s
α (see Table 2). The medians values for PU, PEOU,
ATT, Intention, Trust and as well the trust scale (TS)
are higher for maneuver augmentation in perceived
direction (P) than in logical direction (L). For some
scales, such as TS or TAM PU, the logical direction of

--- Page 12 ---
Wintersberger et al.
57
Figure 7. UX-Curves, drawn by participants describing their experience over time while exposed to the individual conditions.
maneuver augmentation has even lower rates than no
augmentation at all (N). Comparing condition P and
N shows similar values for PU and ATT. PEOU, Inten-
tion, Trust, and TS values are rated better for condition
P than for condition N.
Statistical analysis using Friedman’s ANOVA (as the
data was not normally distributed) shows significant ef-
fects for all variables. We further applied Wilcoxon tests
with Bonferroni correction using a significance level of
p < .017, and report only significant effects, such as
visible for perceived usefulness (PU), χ2(2) = 18.636,
p = .000. Here we can report significant differences
between conditions P and N (Z = −3.320, p = .003),
and P and L (Z = −2.887, p = .012). Also for PEOU
we can observe significant effects, χ2(2) = 17.152,
p = .000, but here only a significant difference between
P and N was found.
Also for Trust, only between N and P a statistically
significant difference exists, χ2(2) = 19.563, p = .000
(Z = 3.300, p = .003). Concerning ATT, we can a re-
port a significant effect (χ2(2) = 9.542, p = .008), but
the post-hoc tests do not reveal any significant differ-
ences between the conditions. For the intention to use
a system, there is no significant effect at all, (χ2(2) =
2.909, p = 2.34).
Considering TS, we can observe a significant effect,
χ2(2) = 70.240, p = .000, where Wilcoxon follow-up
tests reveal differences between all conditions. Augmen-
tation in the perceived direction (P) leads to significantly
higher trust in the overall system than no augmentation
(N, Z = −6425, p = .000), and augmentation in log-
ical direction (L, Z = −3.340, p = .003). Further, no
augmentation (N) was rated significantly better than the
logical direction (L, Z = 3.085, p = .006).
The total scores of the simulator sickness question-
naire (SSQ), however, showed no significant differences
between the three conditions P (M = 59.00, SD =
43.20), L (M = 70.43, SD = 48.19) and N (58.17,
SD = 48.19).
5.3.2 Qualitative Evaluation. A structured analysis
of semistructured interviews with respect to the UX-
Curves drawn by participants confirms the results. Over-
all, condition P led to better experiences that are more
heterogeneous (see Figure 7). In the following, we dis-
cuss interview statements of participants and relate them
to the corresponding UX curve. Interview statements
were translated from German to English.
In total 83.3% (n = 15) reported positive experi-
ences for condition P, compared to the conditions L
(39.0%, n = 7) and N (33.3%, n = 6). Further, for
condition P, 10 participants (55.6%) stated that trust
increased while using the system, 3 (16.7%) reported
a stable but positive experience, while only one par-
ticipant emphasized his experience as negative (this
participant also rated the other conditions L and N
as continuously negative). Comparison of the gradi-
ents in the (positive) UX curves reveals, that in con-
dition P, 60% (n = 9) positively increase over time,
13% (n = 2) remain stable, and 13% (n = 2) are de-
veloping negatively. One curve thereby changed from
the positive to the negative range, also one vice-versa.
Participant P1 expressed that his trust was increasing
from the moment when he recognized and understood
the maneuver augmentations. Especially the indica-
tions of upcoming overtaking maneuvers helped him
not to be “surprised by unexpected behavior” (P1).

--- Page 13 ---
58
PRESENCE: VOLUME 27, NUMBER 1
Another participant (P2) described the experience
during condition P as better, but because of a risky over-
taking maneuver, his trust decreased. After some time,
he stated his trust becoming stable again (but still stay-
ing in the negative range).
Having a detailed look at conditions L and N reveals
that both have similar results. 38.9% (n = 7) of the
curves showed a positive change over time, for 38.9%
(n = 7) remained stable, and for 16.7% (n = 3) the
experience impaired. Gradients show that for all pos-
itive curves in condition L, 28.5% (n = 2) improved,
while 57.1% (n = 4) stay at a certain level in the posi-
tive range. Further, three curves in condition L changed
from a positive to a negative and even five from a nega-
tive to a positive experience.
L1 described his experience as “scary” from the be-
ginning, but then his trust increased continuously dur-
ing a learning process. He/she stated to “try to under-
stand it first, and after a certain time, it became clear and
then I also had a good experience” (L1). Others, such
as L2, stated to become more and more “puzzled” by
the system. He/she stated that even no augmentation
would be better than condition L.
In condition N, 50% (n = 3) of experiences in the
positive range further increased, another 50% (n = 3) re-
mained stable. Only two participants stated that their ex-
perience changed from a negative to a positive one, but
four reported a change from the positive to the nega-
tive range. Four curves continuously remained negative.
For example, participant N2 described the experience
without any visual aid as “strange from beginning to the
end.” He/she emphasized that without any system feed-
back, he/she would never be able to trust an automated
vehicle. Participant N1 reported a positive experience
in the beginning, as he/she was excited to drive with an
AV. After some unexpected situations (such as overtak-
ing maneuvers or turns), his trust decreased. He stated
his sense of balance to be troubled, which led to a dizzy
feeling.
5.4 Discussion
Considering our hypothesis, we accept H2.i
as presenting upcoming driving maneuvers to
driver/passengers that sit facing rearwards indeed in-
creases user acceptance and trust. Especially for scales
addressing trust, such as TS and TAM trust, a statisti-
cally significant difference is visible—at least for one of
the investigated visualization methods (condition P) that
used aids oriented in the direction as perceived by partic-
ipants. However, for some TAM scales (ATT, Intention)
there was no significant difference between any of the
conditions at all. Still, condition P received significantly
higher scores than condition L in TAM PU and TS.
Semi-structured interviews and UX curves confirmed
the assumption that it is easier for passengers to interpret
and anticipate upcoming maneuvers when indicators
point in the direction as experienced, and we thus accept
H2.ii. Of course, the advantage of condition P com-
pared to condition L could be due to the mental effort
needed to “rotate” the visualization to fit the driving
direction. Maybe this advantage would diminish after a
learning phase when exposed to condition L. However,
participants emphasized condition P to be more intuitive
from the beginning, and interview statements confirmed
our initial assumption: facing backwards while driving
with a fully automated vehicle raises concerns for some
users. Beside the lack of trust that can emerge from the
impossibility to monitor the vehicle behavior, some users
also feared to suffer from motion sickness while driving.
Our assumption that knowledge about upcoming ma-
neuvers may reduce motion sickness was, at least by in-
vestigation of SSQ scores, not confirmed. However, this
could also be an effect of the complex setup (the combi-
nation of moving-based driving simulator, HMD, per-
manent need to switch between activities), and should
be addressed in future experiments.
6
Conclusion
In this article, we have presented the results of two
studies addressing user acceptance and trust for future
situations of fully automated driving. We have inves-
tigated two scenarios for level-5 vehicles that demand
high levels of trust from potential users, such as super-
human driving (where vehicles benefit from cooperative
sensing and can drive much faster than the direct line

--- Page 14 ---
Wintersberger et al.
59
Figure 8. Summary of the results obtained in the conducted experiments. In both studies, communication of system decisions using AR technolo-
gies raised TAM and TS scores.
of sight would allow in manual driving) and backward
driving (where the driver/passenger sits in a rotated seat
facing rearwards). In both experiments, we used aug-
mented reality aids aiming to foster trust by increasing
system transparency and communicating upcoming ma-
neuvers. Statistical evaluation of results obtained from
measurements targeting trust and acceptance (TAM and
TS) resulted in significant improvements, and demon-
strate the potential of the presented approach in both
studies (see Figure 8). This was confirmed in additional
qualitative statements given by study participants. In
semistructured interviews, participants further expressed
that negative feelings resulting from the loss of control
in automated driving become more intense in situa-
tions where it becomes harder to anticipate system de-
cisions and foresee vehicle behavior, like in the scenarios
evaluated.
As soon as large numbers of fully automated vehicles
are going to pervade into our traffic systems it will be
highly important to implement means for fostering user
acceptance and trust. To exploit the full benefit of au-
tomated vehicle and C-ITS technology a large ratio of
AVs is essential, and thus skeptic drivers need to be con-
vinced of the advantages. Therefore, augmented reality
is an approach with high potential. Although some argu-
ments for utilizing AR (information in the line of sight
to follow the eyes-on-the-road mantra) in driving ap-
plications become obsolete in fully automated driving,
there are many advantages.
World-fixed augmentation (as evaluated in Study 1)
can use the real environment as display to highlight
which objects in the surrounding are currently im-
portant for decisions of the automation. This method
(implicit communication of system decisions) lets users
quickly anticipate vehicle behavior from the spatial infor-
mation encoded in the augmentation. In contrast to ex-
plicit communication of system decisions (such as symbolic
representation), the approach can more easily be tailored
to fit the needs of individual users and environments,
and further allows to automatically extend to new, yet
unknown driving situations. However, when letting
users “see what the vehicle sees,” an important question
remaining is, which and how (in terms of color coding,
timing, etc.) objects need to be highlighted/augmented.
Still, screen fixed augmentations as presented in Study
2 also have advantages—when presented on a HMD,
they allow notifying the user independent of the viewing
direction, further they could also be presented on clas-
sical in-vehicle displays that need less advanced display
technology.
7
Limitations and Future Work
Studies about trust in automation are highly im-
portant considering the great potential of automated
vehicle and C-ITS technology. The scenarios used
within this article are just examples, but future visions of

--- Page 15 ---
60
PRESENCE: VOLUME 27, NUMBER 1
traffic systems show many other scenarios where users
must trust technology in potentially ambiguous situa-
tions (such as listed in Section 2). All these concepts are
eligible, but it will be essential to discuss these visions
from a human factors perspective, as humans are more
than just simple goods that do not care about how they
are transported. Further, also the underlying relations
between the theoretical constructs of user acceptance,
user experience and trust need to be investigated in or-
der to uncover possible inter-correlations. Since no fully
automated vehicle have been developed yet, it is hard to
draw conclusions on general acceptance.
Although we believe our results to be valid, there
are some limitations. Both studies suffer from a rela-
tively small sample size, and mainly young people from
a technical university have been included. Future studies
should re-evaluate the concepts with additional partic-
ipants representing users of different age, education or
cultural background. Further on, the presented studies
only lay the groundwork for many important investi-
gations. It must be evaluated which symbols and color
coding has the most potential, and which maneuvers
should be addressed, or how to successfully deal with
motion sickness when users perform arbitrary activi-
ties while driving. Additionally, good timings for the
presentations must be identified, and the temporal de-
velopment of trust as well as personality traits of individ-
uals must be considered. To support users in an optimal
way, that is, build a personalized and experience-based
support system, their individual preconditions (such as
dispositional and learned trust, driving experience, etc.)
should be considered, too. Finally, the concept should
also be evaluated in other potentially ambiguous future
automated driving scenarios, such as platooning, lane
reversal, or dynamic intersection management.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported under the FH-Impuls program of the
German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF)
under Grant No. 13FH7I01IA (SAFIR). We further acknowl-
edge the help of our colleagues Thomas Kundinger, Andreas
Riegler, and Clemens Schartmüller in the implementation of
software components and the execution of the user study, and
Julia Reibel for designing the maneuver augmentations.
References
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1975). Belief, attitude, inten-
tion and behavior: An introduction to theory and research.
Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Au, T.-C., Zhang, S., & Stone, P. (2015). Autonomous inter-
section management for semi-autonomous vehicles. In D.
Teodorovi´c (Ed.), The Routledge handbook of transportation
(pp. 88–104).
Bansal, P., & Kockelman, K. (2017). Forecasting Americans’
long-term adoption of connected and autonomous vehicle
technologies. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
Practice, 95, 49–63.
Belanche, D., Casalo, L. V., & Carlos, F. (2012). Integrat-
ing trust and personal values into the technology accep-
tance model: The case of e-government services adoption.
Cuadernos de Econiomia y Direccion de la Empresa, 192–
204.
Davis, F. D. (1993). User acceptance of information technol-
ogy: Systems, characteristics, user perceptions and behavioral
impacts. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies,
38(3) 475–487.
Dickie, D. A., & Boyle, L. N. (2009, October). Drivers’ un-
derstanding of adaptive cruise control limitations. Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 1806–
1810.
Diels, C., & Bos, J. E. (2016). Self-driving car sickness. Ap-
plied Ergonomics, 53, 374–382.
Ekman, F., Johansson, M., & Sochor, J. L. (2016). Creating
appropriate trust for autonomous vehicle systems: A frame-
work for HMI design. Proceedings of the 95th Annual Meet-
ing of the Transportation Research Board. Available from
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8125704
Frison, A. K., Wintersberger, P., Riener, A., & Schartmüller,
C. (2017). Driving Hotzenplotz: A vehicle interface that
fosters the joy of driving. 9th International Conference on
Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Appli-
cations, pp. 247–248.
Haeuslschmid, R., Von Buelow, M., Pfleging, B., & Butz, A.
(2017). Supporting trust in autonomous driving. Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, 319–329.
Helldin, T., Falkman, G., Riveiro, M., & Davidsson, S. (2013).
Presenting system uncertainty in automotive UIs for sup-
porting trust calibration in autonomous driving. Proceedings

--- Page 16 ---
Wintersberger et al.
61
of the 5th International Conference on Automotive User In-
terfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications, 210–217.
Hobert, L., Festag, A., Llatser, I., Altomare, L., Visintainer,
F., & Kovacs, A. (2015). Enhancements of V2X communi-
cation in support of cooperative autonomous driving. IEEE
Communications Magazine, 53, 64–70.
Hoff, K. A., & Bashir, M. (2015). Trust in automation inte-
grating empirical evidence on factors that influence trust.
Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Er-
gonomics Society, 407–434.
Hosseini, A., Bacara, D., & Linkamp, M. (2014). A system
design for automotive augmented reality using stereo night
vision. IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 217–133.
Hu, C., Zhau, G., & Li, D. (2015). An augmented real-
ity night vision enhancement application for see-through
glasses. IEEE International Conference on Multimedia &
Expo Workshops. doi:10.1109/ICMEW.2015.7169860
Kalantari, M., & Rauschnabel, P. (2018). Exploring the early
adopters of augmented reality smart glasses: The case of
Microsoft HoloLens. In Augmented Reality and Vir-
tual Reality (pp. 229–245). Cham: Springer. Retrieved
from https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978
-3-319-64027-3_16
Kamali, M., Dennis, L. A., McAree, O., Fisher, M., & Veres,
S. M. (2017). Formal verification of autonomous vehicle
platooning. In A. Ireland (Ed.), Science of computer pro-
gramming (pp. 88–106). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Kennedy, R. S., Norman, E. L., Berbaum, K. S., & Lilien-
thal, M. G. (1993). Simulator sickness questionnaire: An
enhanced method for quantifying simulator sickness. The
International Journal of Aviation Psychology, S203–S220.
Koelle, M., El Ali, A., Cobus, V., Heuten, W., & Boll, S.
(2017). All about acceptability? Identifying factors for the
adoption of data glasses. CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, S295–S300.
Koo, J., Kwac, J., Ju, W., Steinert, M., Leifer, L., & Nass,
C. (2015). Why did my car just do that? Explaining semi-
autonomous driving actions to improve driver understand-
ing, trust, and performance. International Journal on Inter-
active Design and Manufacturing, 269–275.
Kosinski, R. J. (2015). A literature review on reaction
time. Retrieved from http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/rob
/Courses/InformationInSpeech/CDROM/Literature
/LOTwinterschool2006/biae.clemson.edu/bpc/bp
/Lab/110/reaction.htm
Kujala, S., Roto, V., Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila, K., & Sinnelä,
A. (2011). UX Curve: A method for evaluating long-term
user experience. Interacting with Computers, 23(5), 473–
483. doi:10.1016/j.intcom.2011.06.005
Kyriakidis, M., Happee, R., & de Winter, J. (2014). Public
opinion on automated driving: Results of an international
questionnaire among 5,000 respondents. SSRN Electronic
Journal, 32, 127–140.
Lee, J. D., & See, K. A. (2004). Trust in automation: Design-
ing for appropriate reliance. Human Factors: The Journal of
the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 46(1), 50–80.
Lee, J., Kim, N., Imm, C., Kim, B., Yi, K., & Kim, J. (2016).
A question of trust: An ethnographic study of automated
cars on real roads. 8th International Conference on Automo-
tive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications,
201–208.
Lee, S., Changwon, J., Seokil, M., Byounghyo, L., Jaebum,
C., & Byoungho, L. (2016). See-through light field dis-
plays for augmented reality. SIGGRAPH Asia Virtual Re-
ality Meets Physical Reality: Modelling and Simulating Vir-
tual Humans and Environments, 3:1–3:2. Retrieved from
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2992138.2992142
Litman, T. (2014). Autonomous vehicle implementation predic-
tions. Victora Transport Policy Institute 28.
Marsh, S., & Dibben, M. R. (2003). The role of trust in infor-
mation science and technology. Annual Review of Informa-
tion Science and Technology, 465–498.
Moeckli, J., Brown, T. D., Boyle, L. N., Schwarz, C., & Xiong,
H. (2015). Evaluation of adaptive cruise control interface
requirements on the National Advanced Driving Simulator.
Washington DC: NHTSA Technical Report DOT HS 812
172.
Muir, B. M. (1987). Trust between humans and machines, and
the design of decision aids. International Journal of Man-
Machine Studies, 527–539.
Parasuraman, R., & Riley, V. (1997). Humans and automa-
tion: Use, misuse, disuse, abuse. Human Factors: The Jour-
nal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 39(2),
230–253.
Parent, M. (2007). Advanced urban transport: Automation is
on the way. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 22(2), 9–11.
Park, B.-J., Lee, J.-W., Yoon, C., & Kyong-Ho, K. (2015).
Augmented reality and representation in vehicle for safe
driving at night. International Conference on Informa-
tion and Communication Technology Convergence, 1261–
1263.
Perlin, K. (2016, May-June). Future reality: How emerging
technologies will change language itself. IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, 84–89.

--- Page 17 ---
62
PRESENCE: VOLUME 27, NUMBER 1
Rensink, R. A., O’Regan, J. K., & Clark, J. J. (1997). To see
or not to see: The need for attention to perceive changes in
scenes. Psychological Science, 8, 368–373.
Riener, A., & Ferscha, A. (2013). Enhancing future mass ICT
with social capabilities. In E. Mitteton-Kelly (Ed.), Co-
evolution of intelligent socio-technical systems (pp. 141–184).
New York: Springer.
Rödel, C., Stadler, S., Meschtscherjakov, A., & Tscheligi, M.
(2014). Towards autonomous cars: The effect of autonomy
levels on acceptance and user experience. Proceedings of the
6th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces
and Interactive Vehicular Applications, 1–8.
SAE On-Road Automated Vehicle Standards Committee.
(2014). Taxonomy and definitions for terms related to on-
road motor vehicle automated driving systems. Retrieved from
https://sae.org/standards/content/j3016_201806/
Siegwart, R., Nourbakhsh, l. R., & Scaramuzza, D. (2011).
Introduction to autonomous mobile robots. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Smith, M., Streeter, J., Burnett, G., & Gabbard, J. L. (2015).
Visual search tasks: The effects of head-up displays on driv-
ing and task performance. 7th International Conference on
Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Appli-
cations, 80–87.
Tangmanee, K., & Teeravanrunyou, S. (2012). Effects of
guided arrows on head-up display towards the vehicle wind-
shield. Network of Ergonomics Societies Conference, 1–6.
Venkatesh, V., & Davis, F. D. (2000). A theoretical extension
of the technology acceptance model: Four longitudinal field
studies. Management Science, 46(2), 186–204.
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M., Davis, G. B., & Davis, F. D.
(2003). User acceptance of information technology: Toward
a unified view. MIS Quarterly, 425–478.
Wintersberger, P., & Riener, A. (2016). Trust in technology
as a safety aspect in highly automated driving. ICom, 15(3),
297–310. doi:10.1515/icom-2016-0034
Wintersberger, P., Frison, A.-K., & Riener, A. (2016). Auto-
mated driving system, male, or female driver: Who would
you prefer? Comparative analysis of passengers’ mental con-
ditions, emotional states and qualitative feedback. Proceed-
ings of the 8th International Conference on Automotive User
Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications, 51–58.
