--- Page 1 ---
Evaluation of AR-HUD Interface During an Automated Intervention in
Manual Driving
Nihan Karatas1, Takahiro Tanaka1, Kazuhiro Fujikake1, Yuki Yoshihara1, Yoshitaka Fuwamoto2,
Morihiko Yoshida2, Hitoshi Kanamori1
Abstract— Automated driving systems are envisioned as the
future mode of transportation owing to their projected ability to
reduce human error and achieve more efﬁcient and comfort-
able transportation. Accordingly, designing an interface that
ensures the situational awareness of the human operator to
reduce confusion, false expectations, and over-reliance on the
automated system is important. When a human operator is in
control, the automated system is expected to handle troublesome
situations that the human is unable to manage. Thus, an
interface is required to provide the appropriate information
when necessary so that the human operator can easily perceive
the reason for the sudden automated intervention. In this study,
such a scenario is highlighted, in which a simulated automated
intervention avoided a potential collision with a pedestrian who
suddenly appeared on the roadside. To convey the reason for the
automated intervention, an augmented reality-based head-up
display (AR-HUD) cue that targets the pedestrian is developed.
To understand the effects of the AR-HUD cue on the speed at
which a human operator can recognize a pedestrian and the
contribution of this visual cue to the perception of acceptability
and credibility of the automated intervention, we compared
AR-HUD with a static head-up display (S-HUD) that displays a
pedestrian symbol at the bottom portion of the windshield. The
results showed that the AR-HUD cue yielded faster recognition
of the targeted pedestrian and provided a relatively more
acceptable perception of the automated intervention.
I. INTRODUCTION
Automated cars are seen as the future of transportation, in
which human error will be reduced, saving millions of lives,
while providing a more energy efﬁcient, comfortable, and
convenient method of transportation. The National Highway
Trafﬁc Safety Administration deﬁnes six levels of car auton-
omy: Level 0 – human driver solely performs the driving;
Level 1 – function-speciﬁc automation; Level 2 – simultane-
ous combined functions with automation, the current state-
of-the-art; Level 3 – limited self-driving in which the driver
needs to be ready to take over vehicle control at any time,
Level 4 – full self-driving under certain circumstances; Level
5 – full self-driving in all circumstances in which humans
are just passengers and need not be involved in driving [1].
Among these levels, Level 3 has a signiﬁcant importance as it
is expected to be utilized in the next generation of vehicles
1Nihan Karatas, Takahiro Tanaka, Kazuhiro Fujikake, Yuki Yoshihara
and Hitoshi Kanamori are with Human-Machine Interaction and Hu-
man Characteristics Research Division in Institutes of Innovation for
Future Society, Nagoya University, Fuirocho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-
8601, Japan karatas@mirai.nagoya-u.ac.jp, tanaka,
fujikake, y-yuki, hitoshi kanamori
@coi.nagoya-u.ac.jp
2Yoshitaka
Fuwamoto
and
Morihiko
Yoshida
are
with
the
Toyota
Motor
Corporation.
yoshitaka fuwamoto,
morihiko yoshida@mail.toyota.co.jp
[2]. In recent years, several tech entrepreneurs have tested
their automated driving systems in Level 3 to achieve the
ultimate goal of accomplishing fully automated driving in
the near future [3][4]. Unfortunately, in March 2018, a self-
driving Uber car collided with a pedestrian during its test.
The National Transportation Safety Board reported that one
reason for the accident was that even though the system de-
tected the crossing pedestrian with sufﬁcient time before the
collision, there was insufﬁcient time for the vehicle operator
to detect and react to the crossing pedestrian. This is a typical
effect of automation complacency, and resulted in the failure
of avoiding a collision [5]. This incident shows that the
design and function of the human–machine interface (HMI)
is crucial for ensuring that the human operator and automated
system collaborate in a safe manner. A mutual understanding
between the human operator and automated system ensures
that the human operator obtains the appropriate amount of
driving-related information at the right time, leading to the
establishment of accurate situational awareness [6]. Such
mutual understanding is essential for a suitable calibration of
trust with acceptable and comfortable operation in general. A
misunderstanding between the automated system and human
operator regarding the action of the other party has the
potential to cause false expectations as well as an over-
reliance on the system capability. In contrast, if human
operators have insufﬁcient trust in the system capabilities,
they may refuse to buy or use these systems.
”Automation surprise” is deﬁned as the behavior of an
automated system in which its action is inconsistent with
the expectations of the driver [7]. Hurts et al. mentioned that
automation surprise may occur before the operator becomes
aware of its existence [8]. Automation surprise may also
refer to a positive phenomenon in which a system takes
control of a situation in such a way that the driver does
not expect. However, even though the automation surprise
occurs to handle an unexpected situation, it is important to
minimize the automation surprise and reconcile the driver
to the course of action of the automated system to maintain
its acceptability and credibility. To mitigate the automation
surprise, the reason for unexpected behavior should be
provided by the system in a timely manner so that the
operator can comprehend the situation and adjust his trust
toward the system. Therefore, it is important to design a
HMI that presents driving-related information corresponding
to unexpected situations and the consequent behavior of the
automated system in such a way that the human operator can
promptly comprehend.
2020 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV)
October 20-23, 2020. Las Vegas, USA
978-1-7281-6673-5/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE
2158
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN ONTARIO. Downloaded on May 26,2021 at 10:16:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 2 ---
(a) S-HUD cue appears at a distance of 50 m from a pedestrian standing
on the left side of the road and it stays until the car passes the pedestrian
(b) AR-HUD cue appears at a distance of 50 m from a pedestrian standing
on the left side of the road and it continues to move upward (0.5 m) and
downward (0.5 m) until the car passes the pedestrian
Fig. 1.
Design of (a)(S-HUD) and (b)(AR-HUD)
Drivers receive 80% of driving-related information visu-
ally while looking forward toward the road, which supports
safe driving practices [9]. If the driving-related information
matches the real environment that is in line with the gaze
of the human operator, then the operator can recognize the
information naturally and focus on driving without distrac-
tion. One way to accomplish this is the head-up display
(HUD). HUDs have been proposed as a solution to reduce
the frequency and duration that the eyes of the driver are
off the road by projecting the visual cues of the driving-
related information onto the windshield. When compared to
head-down displays, HUDs have demonstrated reductions in
the response times to unanticipated road events, resulting
in smaller variances in lateral acceleration and steering
wheel angle [10]. HUD-based interfaces provide intuitive
information through appropriate static visual cues presented
close to the outside view of the driver. However, they have
demonstrated an increase in mental load, as indicated by the
longer response times in high workload situations [11][12].
Another limitation of HUDs is the potential for clutter, which
may interfere with the visualization of other objects in the
panorama [13]. A pilot study showed that static visual cues
increased the response times for detecting hazards owing
to obstruction, possibly caused by the nonconformal nature
of the static cue [14]. Furthermore, in a real environment,
cueing of less conspicuous objects by using a static cue may
not be easily noticed by the driver, potentially causing fatal
injuries.
Previous research has identiﬁed that subjects noticed a
target faster when it was explicitly pointed to when compared
to a target that is not emphasized [15]. Herein, one strategy
that can enhance the usage of HUD technology to present
driving-related information is using augmented reality (AR)
with HUDs. AR refers to the combination of real and artiﬁ-
cial elements in the line of sight, with the aim of highlighting
important objects to improve human performance [16]. The
research showed that the detection accuracy of a target in
an aviation visual search task was enhanced by cueing the
target when the object was not conspicuous [17]. Moreover,
the research demonstrated that AR can alert drivers and
direct their attention to dangerous situations [18]. Thus, we
believe that conveying driving-related information through
visual cues using an AR-based HUD (AR-HUD) can enhance
situational awareness and result in shorter response times for
the driver when compared to the utilization of static HUD
(S-HUD) cues.
Because the timing of the presentation of information
reﬂects the system behavior and capability, it must be con-
sistent with the expectation of the driver; otherwise, it may
lead to a reduction in driver trust [19]. Previous research has
shown the effectiveness of alarm promptness on trust [20].
While considering this, not only is the timing of informa-
tion presentation critical, but the recognition timing of the
driver pertaining to the information. However, there has been
minimal investigation on recognition timing and its relation
to acceptability and trust. In this study, we focused on such
a scenario in which a simulated automated driving system
suddenly intervenes in manual driving to avoid a potential
collision with a pedestrian who unexpectedly appears on the
roadside. To reduce the automation surprise and increase
the acceptability of the sudden automated intervention, it
is important to convey driving-related information to the
driver in a timely manner. Reference [21] focused on four
qualities that are important in a HMI for minimizing au-
tomation surprise: observability, predictability, directability,
and timelessness. We believe that a well-designed HMI that
cooperates with the AR-HUD design attributes would reﬂect
these qualities. Accordingly, the reason for the unexpected
maneuver of the automated system would be understood
quicker, resulting in a more acceptable and credible percep-
tion. In this paper, we demonstrate a comparison between an
AR-HUD cue and a S-HUD cue in such a scenario. The
results of this comparison demonstrate that an AR-HUD
based interface is better in providing prompt recognition.
Correspondingly, it may be useful for a better acceptability
and credibility assessment for automated intervention.
II. METHOD
A. Design of Augmented Reality-based Head-up Display
(AR-HUD) and Static Head-up Display (S-HUD) Cues
Previous research utilized pedestrian pictograms [22][23]
or master alerts [24][25] as S-HUD cues to increase the
2159
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN ONTARIO. Downloaded on May 26,2021 at 10:16:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 3 ---
Fig. 2.
Driving simulator and the experimental environment
Fig. 3.
Figure depicts the experimental scenario. The automated inter-
vention occurs with the appearance of the pedestrian and the onset of the
human–machine interface.
awareness of drivers regarding pedestrians. Research pertain-
ing to AR-HUD utilized rectangles [23] or the rhombus shape
of broken lines [26]. In our study, we designed S-HUD and
AR-HUD cues to indicate a pedestrian on the road, which
is the reason for the automated intervention. The S-HUD
was designed using a pedestrian pictogram that showed the
position of the pedestrian on the road (Fig. I(a)). Conversely,
for the AR-HUD cue, we designed a cylinder with a 0.5 m
radius that moves 0.5 m upward and downward by using
the Blender software (version 2.79b). The AR-HUD cue is
placed directly on the pedestrian (Fig. I(b)). The orange color
is chosen for two cues (pedestrian pictogram and cylinder) to
convey a warning rather than an emergency [27]. We placed
the visual cues at the appropriate places on the screen using
the driving simulation software settings.
B. Hypothesis
The mutual understanding between a human operator
and an automated system is important in establishing an
accurate situational awareness with a well-designed HMI
such that the driver can comprehend the actions of the
system, which may reduce the automation surprise and
increase the willingness to use and trust the system. The
design of such a HMI should include multiple modalities,
such as visual, audio, and tactile cues. As the ﬁrst step
of this research, we focused on designing visual cues and
exploring the objective and subjective responses as well as
the impressions of the human operator toward the visual
cues and automated intervention. We hypothesized that an
AR-HUD cue would cause the driver to recognize the target
that indicated a potential obstacle with a shorter response
time than that with the S-HUD cue. Moreover, because the
human operator would recognize the target faster, the reason
for the automated intervention would be comprehended faster
with the AR-HUD cue, resulting in a more acceptable and
credible perception. We also hypothesized that the AR-HUD
interface would provide a better user experience than the S-
HUD interface owing to its explicit and dynamic design.
C. Experimental Setup
The UC-win/Road program (version 13) 1 was used as a
simulation software along with ﬁve monitors, an adjustable
driver seat, a steering wheel, a break, and an accelerator (Fig.
2). The maximum speed of the simulated car was set to 50
km/h. We examined two experimental conditions with the
AR-HUD and S-HUD cues in the same driving route.
In the AR-HUD condition, the AR-HUD cue appeared on
the pedestrian when the car was 50 m away. The cue was
visible on the pedestrian until the car passed him. In the S-
HUD condition, the S-HUD cue was located on the bottom
side of the screen when the car was 50 m away from the
pedestrian, and the cue was visible until the car passed the
pedestrian.
The route was 5 km in the experimental session; moreover,
the participants were asked to drive at a speed of approxi-
mately 40 km/h. The participants started driving the car in
manual mode for 4.5 km, and the automated intervention
scenario occurred at a distance of 0.5 km before the end
of the route. At this point, a pedestrian suddenly appeared
on the left side of the road; simultaneously, the simu-
lated car, which was in manual mode initially, intervened
automatically, and the manual mode was changed to the
automated mode and the car changed lanes to the right 50
m before the pedestrian (Fig. 3). Simultaneously, with the
appearance of the pedestrian and the onset of the automated
intervention, the HMI cue was displayed. The rest of the
trip was completed in the automated mode at a speed of
40 km/h. Both before and during the intervention process,
no other information was presented to the subjects regarding
the purpose of the intervention.
During the experiment, we set the time of the scenario to
be before sunset, at which time the visibility of the objects
was relatively low. Along the road, we also placed a group
of pedestrians on the sidewalk and a construction scene on
the right side of the road to distract the driver from the
targeted pedestrian. Thus, we prevented a potential ceiling
effect that may result from an easily observed target for
both the aforementioned conditions. During the experiment,
to track and evaluate the visual attention of the participants
and their recognition time of the targeted pedestrian, we used
Tobii Pro Glasses 2 2 eye tracker.
2160
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN ONTARIO. Downloaded on May 26,2021 at 10:16:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 4 ---
(a) Example from the AR-HUD condition shows that the participant
recognized the pedestrian in the second step of their gaze
(b) Example from the S-HUD condition shows that the participant recog-
nized the pedestrian in the sixth step of their gaze
Fig. 4.
Figures depict two examples pertaining to the difference between the gaze shifts of two participants in AR-HUD and S-HUD conditions
Fig. 5.
Comparison of the recognition time of participants in the AR-HUD
and S-HUD conditions (***: p<0.001)
D. Procedure
Our experiment was conducted on 36 participants (10
females, 26 males) ranging from 21 to 54 years (mean (M)
= 34.638, standard deviation (SD) = 11.293). We conducted
a between-subjects study to avoid the inﬂuence of learning
effects. All participants possessed a current driving license.
The participants were randomly divided into two groups
of 19 and 17 members to which the AR-HUD and S-
HUD conditions were applied, respectively. Upon arrival,
the participants were given a brief explanation regarding the
experiment. Before starting the experimental sessions, the
participants underwent a 5 min practice session to accustom
them to the driving simulator. The practice session was
conducted on a different road than the road considered in
the experiment. During the practice session, the participants
used the simulated car manually and were exposed to the
automated intervention. After the practice session, the ex-
perimental session was initiated.
After the experimental session, the participants were asked
to complete three questionnaires: the Acceptance Question-
naire for evaluating the automated intervention with the
AR-HUD- or S-HUD-based visual cue, Source Credibility
1http://www.forum8.co.jp/
2https://www.tobiipro.com/
Measurement [20] for evaluating the automated intervention,
and User Experience Questionnaire for evaluating the visual
cue [21].
The experiments were performed after obtaining approval
from the Nagoya University Ethics Committee.
III. RESULTS
Data from two participants and one participant in the
AR-HUD and S-HUD conditions, respectively, were omitted
from the objective and subjective data analyses owing to
low data accuracy. In our analysis, we deﬁned the “response
time” as the time interval between the onset of the HMI and
the ﬁrst observation by the participants of the pedestrian who
suddenly appeared by the roadside.
The average time of ﬁnishing the experimental conditions
was 6 min 46 s (SD = 1 min 0 s). Additionally, the
average speed of the participants just before the automated
intervention and onset of the HMI was 39.218 km/h (SD =
8.142).
A. Eye Gaze Data Analysis
The analysis showed that the gazes of two participants
in the AR-HUD conditions were already on the area of
the targeted pedestrian before the pedestrian and visual cue
appeared. We included the response times of these two
participants by reformulating them as the average value of the
shortest three response times of the other participants. More-
over, the gazes of three participants in the S-HUD condition
were not aligned with the pedestrian at all. Therefore, the
response times of these three participants were reformulated
as the average value of the three longest response times from
the rest of the participants. After these modiﬁcations, we
conducted a two-sample t-test. The results showed that in
the AR-HUD case, the attention of the participants shifted
onto the pedestrian signiﬁcantly faster at the p <0.05 level
than in the S-HUD case after the onset of HMI. (t(15) =
4.825, p = 0.0001).
When compared to the S-HUD condition, the ratings for
the AR-HUD condition pertaining to Q4 and Q13 were
signiﬁcantly higher (t(31) = 1.708, p = 0.048 and t(31) =
2.753, p = 0.004, respectively). The gazing pattern of the
participants showed that under the AR-HUD condition, the
2161
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN ONTARIO. Downloaded on May 26,2021 at 10:16:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 5 ---
Fig. 6.
Acceptance Questionnaire results show signiﬁcant differences for
Q4 and Q13. (***: p<0.001, **: p<0.01, *: p<0.05)
TABLE I
ACCEPTANCE QUESTIONNAIRE ITEMS THREE ITEMS ARE BASED ON
HEAD-UP DISPLAY-BASED CUE, TWO ITEMS ARE BASED ON AUTOMATED
INTERVENTION, AND SIX ITEMS ARE BASED ON THE COMPATIBILITY OF
AUTOMATED INTERVENTION AND HEAD-UP DISPLAY-BASED CUE.
Code
Question
Q1
I could easily recognize the visual cue.
Q2
There is nothing wrong with the visual cue.
Q3
The visual cue was annoying.
Q4
Nothing was wrong with the execution of
automated intervention.
Q5
The function of automated intervention was troublesome.
Q6
The visual cue allowed me to understand the execution
of the automated intervention.
Q7
The reason why the automated intervention was executed
can be understood from the visual cue.
Q8
I do not have any complaints about the visual cue.
Q9
Thanks to the visual cue, I did not have any anxiety
during the automated intervention.
Q10
Thanks to the visual cue, the function of the automated
intervention was reliable.
Q11
I will use this visual cue and automated
intervention in my car.
Q12
I think the visual cue and the automated intervention
will be helpful for my driving.
Q13
I was able to identify the targeted pedestrian quickly.
Q14
If you have any comments or feedback, please describe
freely.
participants recognized the targeted pedestrian in fewer steps
after the onset of HMI (Fig. II-D(a)). However, in the S-HUD
case, the gazing pattern showed that the participants noticed
the targeted pedestrian after they gazed at the S-HUD cue
and then, after several steps of gazing, they shifted their gaze
to the targeted pedestrian (Fig. II-D(b)).
When considered together, these results suggest that the
AR-HUD-based visual cue achieved shorter response times
of the drivers in recognizing the targeted pedestrian on the
road.
B. Subjective Evaluations
1) Acceptance of the Automated Intervention with the
Human–machine Interface (HMI) Cue:
The Acceptance
Questionnaire for the automated intervention created by us
consisted of 14 items, in which the last was an open question
(Table. I). The questionnaire responses were scored on a
TABLE II
CORRELATION BETWEEN THE RESPONSE TIME AND THE ACCEPTABILITY
QUESTIONNAIRE ITEMS (left), THE SOURCE CREDIBILITY MEASURE
FACTORS (right top) AND USER EXPERIENCE QUESTIONNAIRE ((right
bottom)) IN AR-HUD AND S-HUD CONDITIONS
.
Acceptability Questionnaire
Source Credibility M.
Code
Response Time
Factor
Response Time
AR-HUD
S-HUD
AR-HUD
S-HUD
Q1
-0.691**
0.3
Comp.
-0.531*
-0.285
Q2
-0.621*
-0.096
Caring.
-0.564*
-0.548*
Q3
0.01
-0.354
Trust.
-0.637**
-0.392
Q4
-0.095
-0.058
Q5
0.363
0.085
User Experience Q.
Q6
-0.301
-0.242
Factor
Response Time
Q7
-0.188
-0.589*
AR-HUD
S-HUD
Q8
-0.344
0.072
Attr.
-0.400
0.359
Q9
-0.423
-0.007
Eff.
-0.564*
0.183
Q10
-0.387
0.045
Pers.
-0.102
-0.197
Q11
-0.411
0.064
Dep.
-0.257
0.349
Q12
-0.546*
0.008
Stim.
-0.291
0.169
Q13
-0.543*
0.166
Novelty
-0.081
0.010
seven-point Likert scale: 7 (strongly agree), 6 (moderately
agree), 5 (agree), 4 (neutral), 3 (disagree), 2 (moderately
disagree), and 1 (strongly disagree). We applied a two-
sample t-test to reveal the differences in the results from the
questionnaire items for both conditions. The results showed
signiﬁcant differences between the two conditions for Q4 and
Q13 (Fig. 6).
We also checked the correlations between the Acceptance
Questionnaire items and the response time values for the
two conditions. For the AR-HUD condition, we identiﬁed
signiﬁcant correlations that were strongly negative (r(16)
= -0.691, p = 0.003) and moderately negative (r(16) = -
0.621, p = 0.01; r(16) = -0.546, p = 0.028 and r(16) = -
0.543, p = 0.029) between the response time values and Q1,
Q2, Q12 and Q13, respectively. For the S-HUD condition,
we identiﬁed a signiﬁcant moderately negative correlation
between the response time and Q7 (r(15) = -0.589, p =
0.016) (Table II (left)).
2) Credibility of the Automated Intervention: The Source
Credibility Measurement items were also scored on a seven-
point Likert scale. The results of a two-sample t-test showed
no statistically signiﬁcant difference between the AR-HUD
and S-HUD conditions pertaining to the factors of Com-
petence, Caring, or Trustworthiness (Fig. 7) on the p
<0.05 level. However, when we checked the correlations
between the response time and the credibility factors for
each condition, we observed signiﬁcant moderately negative
correlations between the response time and the factors of
Competence (r(17) = -0.531, p = 0.034), Caring/Goodwill
(r(17) = -0.564, p = 0.022), and Trustworthiness (r(17) =
-0.637, p = 0.007) for the AR-HUD condition. In addition,
we observed a signiﬁcant moderately negative correlation
between the response time and the Caring/Goodwill factor
(r(17) = -0.548, p = 0.027) for the S-HUD condition (Table
II (right top)).
3) User Experience Quality of the HMI Cue: The User
Experience Questionnaire items were again scored on a
2162
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN ONTARIO. Downloaded on May 26,2021 at 10:16:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 6 ---
Fig. 7.
Source credibility measurement results
seven-point Likert scale. The results of a two-sample t-test
showed no statistically signiﬁcant difference for the Attrac-
tiveness, Perspicuity, Efﬁciency, Dependability, Stimulation,
or Novelty factors on the p <0.05 level (Fig. 8). However, we
observed a moderate negative correlation between response
time and the Efﬁciency facfor (r(17) = -0.564, p = 0.022) for
the AR-HUD condition (Table II (right bottom)).
4) User Comments and Feedback: Participants primarily
complained about the difﬁculty in operating the steering.
One participant commented that she could not pay sufﬁ-
cient attention to the road because she was concentrating
on driving accurately. Predominantly, the comments of the
participants were regarding the insufﬁciency of the warning
system. Three participants from the AR-HUD group and
one participant from the S-HUD group commented that they
wished to have an audio warning along with the visual
cue. Two participants from the AR-HUD group and four
participants from the S-HUD group stated that they were
surprised and scared by the sudden intervention of the
automated system. Three participants indicated that they did
not feel safe when the car changed lanes without providing
any safety conﬁrmation; consequently, they preferred the car
to stop. One participant reported that the driving method
of the automated system did not match the method of the
participant. Furthermore, three participants indicated that
they could not understand if they or the automated system
was driving.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this research, we compared the effects of the AR-
HUD- and S-HUD-based visual cues on human operators
upon an automated intervention to avoid a potential col-
lision with a pedestrian who has suddenly appeared on
the roadside. The results showed that the AR-HUD-based
visual cues provided signiﬁcantly shorter recognition time
of the pedestrian and encouraged the human operators to
demonstrate a marginally better perception of the automated
intervention. While driving, evoking spatial attention allows
drivers to selectively process visual information through the
prioritization of an area within the visual ﬁeld. Research
has demonstrated that when spatial attention is evoked, an
Fig. 8.
User Experience Questionnaire results
observer is typically faster and more accurate in detecting a
target that appears in an expected location when compared
to an unexpected location [28]. According to the ”spotlight
metaphor”, the focus of attention is analogous to the beam
of a spotlight [29]. The movable spotlight is directed at
one location and everything within its beam is noted and
processed preferentially, while information outside the beam
remains unattended. Our ﬁndings of a faster recognition
of the pedestrian by shifting the attention of the human
operators to a speciﬁc location by utilizing an AR-HUD
cue also support this theory. In addition, the results of the
subjective evaluation (Q13) support our objective ﬁndings
that human operators were aware that they could easily
recognize the target. Furthermore, the indication that the
gazing patterns of the participants demonstrated fewer shifts
until the targeted pedestrian was noticed in the AR-HUD
condition conﬁrmed our hypothesis (Fig. II-D). Based on
these ﬁndings, we can infer that the human operators can
recognize the targets quicker when they are explicitly and
dynamically indicated rather than implicitly and statically
indicated on the windshield.
We also hypothesized that with a rapid recognition of the
target, the acceptance of the automated intervention by the
participants will be higher, and more credit is expected to
be given to the automated system when an AR-HUD-based
visual cue is used. The negative correlation between the
recognition time and the three questions from the Acceptabil-
ity Questionnaire (Q1, Q2, Q12 and Q13) in the AR-HUD
condition showed that as the recognition time decreased,
the perception of recognition of the target improved. These
results can be closely related to the credibility perception
of the automated system. The ﬁndings of recent research
demonstrated that when a system is more transparent and
provides the reasons for its behavior, then the users may be-
come more forgiving and accepting toward the system, even
if the behavior of the system is perceived to be bad [30][31].
Herein, even though the results of the credibility analysis
did not show a meaningful difference between the AR-HUD
and S-HUD conditions, we can infer from the correlation
results that the perception of the human operators regarding
the credibility of the automated system may depend on how
fast they recognize the reason for the behavior of the system.
The automated intervention was generally perceived as
abrupt and caused dissatisfaction to the participants for both
conditions. Therefore, the considerably low ratings for Q9
2163
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN ONTARIO. Downloaded on May 26,2021 at 10:16:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

--- Page 7 ---
may indicate this unpleasant perception of the automated
system; moreover, unlike our expectations, the AR-HUD was
not effective in enhancing this perception even though it
provided faster recognition of the target. One reason for
this might be the insufﬁcient modality of the interface, as
indicated by the comments of certain participants. As these
types of abrupt interventions, in other words, automation sur-
prises, may likely occur in the future with real autonomous
cars in real-world scenarios, it is important to leverage
the unpleasant perception of human operators through other
modalities, such as audio or tactile cues, in addition to a
HUD-based cue.
Limitations: This experiment was conducted using a
driving simulator and two-dimensional HUD-based visual
cues. The results of this study may change owing to the
different depth perceptions of the AR and HUD technologies.
In addition, the number of participants used in this study is
relatively low. Nonetheless, our ﬁndings suggest that the two
HUD-based cues merit further investigation. Future studies
would beneﬁt from larger sample sizes and a more realistic
application of AR-HUD and S-HUDs, as our marginally
modest experiment raised the possibility that some of the
factors that were non-signiﬁcant may have had certain effects
that we were unable to detect.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we demonstrated that an AR-HUD-based
visual cue could provide a faster response time and facilitate
the human operator recognizing a potential obstacle. The
results also showed that with a shorter recognition time,
the credibility of the automated system is likely to increase.
While considering the design of a more acceptable and credi-
ble interface during an unexpected automated intervention, it
was speculated that using only a visual cue may not provide
a sufﬁcient understanding between the system and the human
operator. In future studies, we will examine different modal-
ities and their combinations to support and satisfy human
operators for better automated driving experiences.
REFERENCES
[1] N. H. T. S. Administration et al., “Preliminary statement of policy
concerning automated vehicles,” Washington, DC, pp. 1–14, 2013.
[2] J. Bierstedt, A. Gooze, C. Gray, J. Peterman, L. Raykin, and J. Walters,
“Effects of next-generation vehicles on travel demand and highway
capacity,” FP Think Working Group, vol. 8, pp. 10–1, 2014.
[3] T. Vanderbilt, “Let the robot drive: The autonomous car of the future
is here,” Wired Magazine, Conde NAST, www. wired. com, pp. 1–34,
2012.
[4] S. L. Poczter and L. M. Jankovic, “The google car: driving toward
a better future?” Journal of Business Case Studies (JBCS), vol. 10,
no. 1, pp. 7–14, 2014.
[5] “National transportation safety board. collision between vehicle
controlled
by
developmental
automated
driving
system
and
pedestrian,”
https://www.ntsb.gov/news/events/Documents/2019-
HWY18MH010-BMG-abstract.pdf, november 19, 2019.
[6] M. R. Endsley, “Toward a theory of situation awareness in dynamic
systems,” Human factors, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 32–64, 1995.
[7] S. Dekker, Report of the ﬂight crew human factors investigation
conducted for the Dutch safety board into the accident of TK1951,
Boeing 737-800 near Amsterdam Schiphol Airport, February 25, 2009.
Lund University, School of Aviation, 2009.
[8] K. Hurts and R. J. de Boer, “Automation surprise looked at from a
demands-resources perspective,” in Proceedings of the human factors
and ergonomics society Europe chapter annual conference, 2015, pp.
221–233.
[9] A. S. Cohen and R. Hirsig, Feed forward programming of car drivers’
eye movement behavior: A system theoretical approach. Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology, Department of Behavioral Science, 1980.
[10] Y.-C. Liu, “Effects of using head-up display in automobile context on
attention demand and driving performance,” Displays, vol. 24, no. 4-5,
pp. 157–165, 2003.
[11] C. D. Wickens, R. Martin-Emerson, and I. Larish, “Attentional tun-
neling and the head-up display,” 1993.
[12] E. Fischer and R. F. Haines, “Cognitive issues in head-up displays,”
1980.
[13] S. Y. Cheng, A. Doshi, and M. M. Trivedi, “Active heads-up display
based speed compliance aid for driver assistance: A novel interface and
comparative experimental studies,” in 2007 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles
Symposium.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 594–599.
[14] M. C. Schall and P. Gavin, “Attraction without distraction: Effects of
augmented reality cues on driver hazard perception,” 2010.
[15] R. T. Azuma, “A survey of augmented reality,” Presence: Teleoperators
& Virtual Environments, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 355–385, 1997.
[16] D. L. Fisher and K. C. Tan, “Visual displays: The highlighting
paradox,” Human factors, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 17–30, 1989.
[17] M. Yeh and C. D. Wickens, “Display signaling in augmented reality:
Effects of cue reliability and image realism on attention allocation and
trust calibration,” Human Factors, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 355–365, 2001.
[18] M. Tonnis, C. Sandor, G. Klinker, C. Lange, and H. Bubb, “Experi-
mental evaluation of an augmented reality visualization for directing
a car driver’s attention,” in Fourth IEEE and ACM International
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR’05).
IEEE,
2005, pp. 56–59.
[19] A. M. Parkes and S. Franzen, Driving future vehicles.
CRC Press,
1993.
[20] G. Abe and J. Richardson, “Alarm timing, trust and driver expectation
for forward collision warning systems,” Applied ergonomics, vol. 37,
no. 5, pp. 577–586, 2006.
[21] O. Carsten and M. H. Martens, “How can humans understand their
automated cars? hmi principles, problems and solutions,” Cognition,
Technology & Work, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 3–20, 2019.
[22] A. Wuryandari, Y. Gondokaryono, and I. M. Y. Widnyana, “Design
and implementation of driver main computer and head up display on
smart car,” Procedia Technology, vol. 11, pp. 1041–1047, 2013.
[23] M. T. Phan, I. Thouvenin, and V. Fr´emont, “Enhancing the driver
awareness of pedestrian using augmented reality cues,” in 2016 IEEE
19th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems
(ITSC).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1298–1304.
[24] D. Large, V. Banks, C. Harvey, and G. Burnett, “Towards a predictive
model of driver acceptance of active collision avoidance systems,”
2018.
[25] C. Merenda, H. Kim, J. L. Gabbard, S. Leong, D. R. Large, and
G. Burnett, “Did you see me? assessing perceptual vs. real driving
gains across multi-modal pedestrian alert systems,” in Proceedings
ofx the 9th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces
and Interactive Vehicular Applications, 2017, pp. 40–49.
[26] M. L. Rusch, M. C. Schall Jr, P. Gavin, J. D. Lee, J. D. Dawson,
S. Vecera, and M. Rizzo, “Directing driver attention with augmented
reality cues,” Transportation research part F: trafﬁc psychology and
behaviour, vol. 16, pp. 127–137, 2013.
[27] A. Chapanis, “Hazards associated with three signal words and four
colours on warning signs,” Ergonomics, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 265–275,
1994.
[28] M. I. Posner, “Orienting of attention,” Quarterly journal of experi-
mental psychology, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 3–25, 1980.
[29] M. I. Posner, C. R. Snyder, and B. J. Davidson, “Attention and the
detection of signals.” Journal of experimental psychology: General,
vol. 109, no. 2, p. 160, 1980.
[30] N. Tintarev and J. Masthoff, “A survey of explanations in recom-
mender systems,” in 2007 IEEE 23rd international conference on data
engineering workshop.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 801–810.
[31] R. Sinha and K. Swearingen, “The role of transparency in recom-
mender systems,” in CHI’02 extended abstracts on Human factors in
computing systems, 2002, pp. 830–831.
2164
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN ONTARIO. Downloaded on May 26,2021 at 10:16:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
