--- Page 1 ---
Abstract— The takeover phase from highly automated 
systems, when the transition phase is short (here 10s), is critical 
for the driver when he has been out of the driving loop. We 
conducted a simulator study on 26 drivers to compare three 
conditions: manual mode (MD), transition from automated 
driving (AD) to MD with a classical head up display (HUD), 
transition from (AD) to MD with an augmented reality (AR) 
HUD. In our scenarios, the driver has to take over to respect the 
navigation request for a lane change, and has to face slowing 
traffic in the destination lane.  
Compared to MD, driving behavior is altered in the transition 
phase up to 30s: the maximum speed on the brake pedal is 
higher, resulting acceleration being thus increased. AR reduces 
both these effects, thus improving driving comfort while facing 
slow traffic. AR also helps better anticipate the lane change 
maneuver: it increases the distance to the maneuver limit point. 
As such, the situational awareness seems to be improved by AR. 
Further analysis of eye tracking data and verbatim is needed to 
confirm this assumption based on driving data. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In the near future, technology advances will allow the 
realization of cars equipped with level 3 automation, named 
Limited Self-Driving Automation. The NHTSA defines this 
level as “enabling the driver to cede full control of all safety-
critical functions under certain traffic or environmental 
conditions and in those conditions to rely heavily on the 
vehicle to monitor for changes in those conditions requiring 
transition back to driver control. The driver is expected to be 
available for occasional control, but with sufficiently 
comfortable transition time.” [1].  
Works on determining the necessary time speak of a 
minimum of 10s [2]. But it can be feared that 10s is too short 
a time for the driver to gain complete situation awareness [3], 
especially if the driving situation is complex [2] e.g. when the 
driver has to make a lane change in order to avoid an obstacle 
[4] [5] or to reach a desired lane (e.g. highway exit). In an 
automated driving (AD) mode, the driver is out of the driving 
loop and may be distracted by another task [6], so that, at the 
takeover request (TOR), he has to, first, switch his attention 
towards this TOR, understand the current driving situation, 
choose the appropriate actions and finally act on the vehicle. 
It can be said that the transition phase from AD to MD is a 
critical phase for NHTSA level 3 systems from a human 
factors point of view, which is why we focus on this item. 
Head-up displays (HUD) help the driver keep his eyes on 
the road [7]. Augmented reality-(AR) HUDs, also called 
                                                          
*Research supported by IRT System X, LRA project. 
S. Langlois is with IRT SystemX and Renault, Technocentre, 1 avenue du 
Golf, 78084 Guyancourt Cedex, API : TCR AVA 0 52; (+33 (0) 
176859027; (e-mail: sabine.langlois@renault.com).  
contact analog HUDs, allow direct superimposition of the 
information onto the real spatiotemporal context, which helps 
the driver detect, analyze and react appropriately [7]. As such, 
we assume that AR can help the driver when he is taking over, 
to better rebuild his situational awareness and adopt a safer 
driving behavior. As it is observed that the driver’s actions, 
when resuming the control of the vehicle, are brutal (there is 
over-compensation on steering and pedals [8]), we also 
assume that AR could reduce this effect, and thus enhance 
driving comfort. 
To check our hypotheses, we compare three conditions: 
manual mode (MD), transition from AD to MD with AR, 
transition from AD to MD with a reference HMI placed on a 
classical HUD.  
We conduct a simulator study and prepare scenarios 
where the driver has to take over within 10s to make a lane 
change following navigation instructions. As driving is a 
highly dynamic activity, we consider that the driver gets 
information about his environment and is thus able to 
anticipate the evolution of the situation through his actions 
[9]. We expect to get insights about the driver’s situational 
awareness thanks to his driving and ocular behaviors, and 
thanks to verbatim collected by explicitation interviews [10].   
We first present our testing method, then describe, analyze 
and discuss the results of driving behavior  
I. METHOD 
A. Experimental setup 
The study is conducted on a Renault driving simulator, 
CARDS. It is a full vehicle mock-up with a 240° field of view. 
The driver is seated at 2.2m from the main screen. CARDs 
has already been used for AR HUD studies [11]. Due to 
technical problems, it is not possible to use both eye tracker 
and stereoscopic projection at the beginning of the testing; we 
therefore use a monoscopic projection. SCANeR® studio 
software [12] is used to run the driving simulation.  
We develop a driving supervisor able to perform high 
speed automated driving on the highway, without lane change 
[13]. Its level of automation corresponds to NHTSA level 3. 
To take over, the driver is required to push on button A 
located on the steering wheel (see Fig 1). As soon as button A 
is pushed, the driver is in MD. If the driver does not push on 
button A but places his hands on the steering wheel, the 
system will move on to MD at the end of the transition phase 
that lasts 10s; if not, it will perform the minimum risk 
B. Soualmi is with IRT SystemX, 8, Avenue de la Vauve - CS 90070, 
91127 Palaiseau Cedex (e-mail: Boussaad.soualmi@irt-systemx.fr) 
Augmented reality versus classical HUD to take over from 
automated driving: an aid to smooth reactions and to anticipate 
maneuvers1* 
S.Langlois, B.Soualmi 
2016 IEEE 19th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC)
Windsor Oceanico Hotel, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, November 1-4, 2016
978-1-5090-1889-5/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
1571

--- Page 2 ---
maneuver, which consists of braking the vehicle to a complete 
stop. During the transition phase, the system cruises as in AD 
mode. 
In MD, the driver is assisted by two informative systems: 
a distance warning that measures the security distance from 
the vehicle in front in the same lane, and a blind spot warning 
that indicates the presence of a car in the blind spot. 
The HMI supervisor receives information from the 
simulated sensors and from the driving supervisor. Its rules 
define what should be displayed to the driver, how and when. 
The driver receives visual information from two HUDs: 
the "classical HUD" dedicated to classical information like 
on-going speed and TOR message, and one dedicated to AR 
(“AR HUD”). These HUDs have a surface respectively equal 
to 4*15° and to 9*15° (from 0 to -9° vertically, where 0° is 
the horizon). The classical HUD images are generated by a 
dedicated pico-projector (Optoma ML 1500e), chosen for its 
high luminosity and contrast. The AR-HUD is simulated by a 
virtual HUD, a module of SCANeR® especially developed 
for our project [14]. It simulates the image produced by a real 
HUD (field of view, projection distance, color, transparency). 
The side mirrors are an additional way to provide 
information to the driver, to warn about a car present on the 
side of the car. Sounds are also emitted, especially one for 
takeover, that lasts during the whole transition phase and is 
designed to sound more and more urgent. 
A touch screen placed in the middle of the dash board is 
used to play a game, Sonic Dash, during AD mode. This game 
was chosen as non-driving-related activity because it requires 
a constant visual and cognitive attention from the player who 
has to help a character run and jump along a tricky road. 
We can collect data about the driver’s behavior from an 
eye tracker, a hand sensor on the steering wheel, and from 
different vehicle performance sensors that will be described 
in chapter III. 
Figure 1 shows the components of the configuration to be 
tested. 
 
Figure 1.  
Components integrated into the simulator. 
A. HMI design 
Two HMI conditions are compared: with and without AR. 
The following table (table I) describes the objects highlighted 
by AR in both MD and AD modes. We follow Eyraud’s 
recommendations [15] based on Wickens’s model of the 
allocation of visual attention [16]: as AR adds saliency, it 
should be associated only with task-related cues to avoid 
distraction. 
In AD, all surrounding vehicles are highlighted to show 
the driver that the system detects and takes into account the 
traffic around him: the lead vehicle is differentiated so that the 
driver can understand on which vehicle the longitudinal 
control is carried out. 
TABLE I.  
OBJECTS HIGHLIGHTED BY AR IN MD AND AD MODES 
 
A previous expert testing showed that the highlight of the 
car ahead should be thin in MD, so as not to interfere with the 
driving scene, and that the highlight in AD could be thicker, 
so as to be quickly detected when the driver briefly interrupts 
his non-driving-related activity to check that the system has a 
correct comprehension of the surrounding traffic, and also to 
increase the difference between AD and MD, thus limiting 
confusion between modes. 
To highlight the lane to take, we decide to show the driver 
which constraint to take into account rather than impose a 
trajectory to follow. We choose the iconic representation of 
the signs used along roads to warn about dangerous curves 
(see Fig 4). One virtual sign is placed every 14m. This design 
respects the recommendations given by Pfannmüller et al. 
[17] (better use a "boomerang" type design than arrows; limit 
animations). Lorenz [5] shows that an AR design that 
highlights the place not to go, in red color (the obstacle 
forward in his study) produces inappropriate driving 
strategies (braking instead of steering action). Our highlight 
rather shows the envelope of the possible trajectories. Ng-
Thow-Hing et al. in [18] also recommend providing drivers 
with better information to improve their driving decisions 
rather than explicitly telling them what to do. The AR signs 
are masked by vehicles (see Fig 4) because we consider their 
priority as lower. 
The following picture (Fig 2) shows, in AD, the TOR 
phase with AR. The AR signs for the exit to take (chevron-
shaped blue and white signs) and for the lead vehicle (green 
trapezoid) can be seen. Vehicles on adjacent lanes would be 
highlighted with a white rectangle beneath. On the classical 
HUD, the current speed and speed limit, navigation and 
takeover messages can be seen. 
As soon as the driver has pressed button A, he is in MD 
and HMI is the following (Fig 3), with an AR U-shaped line 
under the car ahead (here orange to warn the driver that he 
should decelerate). 
Without AR, the whole information is located on the 
classical HUD. For AD, we developed a birds eye view (Fig 
4) that covers approximately the same spatial context as AR 
Touch 
screen
HUD for AR
Surface 9*15°
Classical HUD
Surface 4*15°
Side mirrors
Hand sensor
Eye tracker
HMI supervisor
Driving data
Driving supervisor
Sounds
A
1572

--- Page 3 ---
(3 lanes ahead, up to 75m). It shows the shape of the road and 
the cars around. The ego car is represented by a blue 
rectangle, the lead vehicle by a green rectangle and a vehicle 
on an adjacent lane by a white rectangle. AD duration is also 
indicated. In MD, a classical icon dedicated to the distance 
warning system is used (here in orange because the distance 
from the vehicle ahead is too short, see Fig 5).  
 
Figure 2.  
TOR phase with AR (AD mode is on) 
 
Figure 3.  
MD with AR  
 
Figure 4.  
AD without AR: the birds eye view 
 
Figure 5.  
Classical HUD with  warning icon in MD 
Contrary to Lorenz [5] whose baseline HMI was an icon in 
the instrument cluster and a warning sound, we want to 
compare AR to the “state of the art” technology, i.e. to a 
classical HUD, to see if the industrial effort to implement an 
AR-HUD inside the car is worth it. As a summary, we 
compared both following HMI conditions:  
• 
With AR: speed, speed limit, navigation and AD 
messages are on the classical HUD, AR is on the 
AR-HUD and on the side mirrors (rectangle on 
the car). 
• 
Without AR: speed, speed limit, navigation and 
AD messages, birds eye view in AD or distance 
warning icon in MD are on the classical HUD; an 
icon can appear on the side mirrors. 
As both HMI conditions share the same modality (vision) 
and the same technology (HUD), we limit comparison bias. 
B. Test procedure 
To avoid testing the discovery phase of the system, we 
divided the testing into three phases: the first takes place in a 
real car and the next two in CARDs. 
The first one consists of driving a Mini Cooper car for one 
hour under adaptive cruise control and a classical HUD, to 
allow the participant to gain experience of the longitudinal 
control managed by the car and of HUD displays in a real car. 
The second phase lasts around one hour. The participant 
discovers the simulator, the simulated freeway and its traffic, 
the AD system, the HMI and the game. He exercises the TOR. 
It is the opportunity to study the driver’s impressions while 
monitoring the system in AD.  
In the third phase, the participant has to drive three times, 
in each experimental condition: 1-in MD, 2-in AD without 
AR, and 3-in AD with AR (within-subject design). The 
conditions are counterbalanced. Each runs lasts 11min, to 
allow the driver to be fully disconnected from the driving task 
in AD. It takes place on a three lane-highway with a 90km/h 
speed limit. At the end of the run, the driver is expected to 
make a lane change maneuver in MD and to slow down in this 
lane due to a braking vehicle ahead. We prepared three 
different scenarios sharing these characteristics to avoid 
participant habituation. The last scene of the first scenario 
(hereafter called “scene 1”) consists of changing to the left 
lane due to a highway split and dealing with a braking vehicle 
in this new lane. The last scene of the second scenario 
(hereafter called “scene 2”) consists of moving left towards a 
busy lane, also due to a highway split. The last scene of the 
third scenario (hereafter called “scene 3”) consists of 
changing to the right lane to take the next exit and dealing 
with a braking vehicle ahead. The scenes are counterbalanced. 
We planned the TOR message (hereafter called TOR) in 
AD to appear 546m before the hatched road markings that 
define the maneuver limit point: as described in Fig 6. 264m 
before is the point where the vehicle should be stopped at the 
end of the minimum risk maneuver to still allow the driver to 
handle the lane change maneuver, and 282m is the distance 
required by the AD system to drive the car during the 10s 
transition phase and to stop it during the minimum risk 
maneuver (MRM on the next figure). 
From the TOR to the end of the scenario, the driver usually 
drives around 30s. 
In MD, the driver ends the scenario (navigation message 
and ending scene) without AR. To be as surprising as in AD, 
the navigation message also appears only 30s before the end 
of the scenario. We thus explore the comparison between MD 
and AD in the situation where the driver should perform an 
unexpected 
lane 
change 
maneuver, 
here 
artificially 
1573

--- Page 4 ---
represented by a navigation task that should normally be 
planned by the system. 
Figure 6.  
The TOR message and the exit configuration (scene 3)  
C. Participants 
All participants are Renault employees who share the 
following characteristics: they drive at least three times a 
week, they use a cruise control, and are interested in AD cars. 
Those who volunteer are all men, aged from 24 to 61 
(mean=47). From the 36 people we recruit, due to simulator 
sickness and technical problems, 26 results are available for 
each condition. 
D. Hypotheses to check 
We presume that driving behavior is modified in the 
manual phase that follows TOR, compared to the same 
situation in MD, and that AR helps the driver in this phase. 
Our four hypotheses are the following: 
 
Driver’s reaction is sharper after TOR than in MD 
(H1). AR minimizes this effect (H2). 
 
After TOR, the driver has a higher risk of missing 
the exit / lane to take (H3). AR helps reduce this risk 
(H4). 
III. CONSIDERED VARIABLES  
We focus our attention on the last part of the scenarios of 
the third phase, from TOR to the end of the run. 
In order to check the hypotheses, we analyze the driver’s 
reaction to TOR, the vehicle dynamics and the impact of AR 
on the driver’s situation awareness. 
The driver’s behavior is analyzed with regard to his actions 
to take over the driving; the way he handles the steering wheel 
and the car pedals. As he has to make a lane change, the 
correlation between the AR indication and the success of the 
maneuver is expected. We expect the distance at which the 
driver makes the lane change to be before the hatched road 
markings, this point being considered as the limit point 
maneuver (see Fig 6). In SCANeR [12] simulation 
environment, the lane change is triggered when the vehicle's 
center of gravity passes over the lane markings: we then 
consider that the driver has arrived in the destination lane. The 
comfort of the lane change maneuver is judged by looking at 
the lateral accelerations. 
In MD the degree of risk of forward collision is measured 
by the time headway (THW) expressed as:  
𝑇𝐻𝑊=
𝐷𝑖𝑛𝑡
𝑣𝑒𝑔𝑜              (1) 
Where 𝐷𝑖𝑛𝑡 is the distance from the vehicle ahead and 𝑣𝑒𝑔𝑜 
is the ego vehicle speed.  
We summarize below the variables that we calculate: 
• 
Hands on (s): duration between TOR and the time 
when the driver puts his hands on the steering wheel. 
• 
Press button (s): duration between TOR and the time 
when the driver presses button A deactivating the 
AD mode.   
• 
Pedal pressed (s): duration between TOR and the 
time when the driver presses one of the vehicle 
pedals for the first time;  
o 
Brake pedal: considered as pushed when 
the force applied is greater than 2N; this 
value is considered in order to avoid 
interpreting a touch of the pedal as a push. 
o 
Accelerator pedal: as for the brake pedal, 
we consider a value of 1%.  
• 
Steering >2° (s): duration between the time when the 
driver puts his hand on the steering wheel and the 
time when he alters steering by at least 2°. 
• 
Indicator (s): duration between TOR and the time 
when the driver activates the indicator relative to the 
destination lane. 
• 
Lane change (s): duration between TOR and the time 
when the driver arrives in the destination lane. 
• 
Steering rate (°/s): measuring how smoothly the 
driver acts on the steering wheel. Maximum value 
and frequency spectrum are analyzed.  
• 
Depression speed of the gas and brake pedals (%/s 
and N/s respectively): measuring how the driver acts 
on the car pedals. The first and maximum pedal 
speeds are calculated. 
• 
Vehicle longitudinal acceleration (m/s2). The 
maximum is calculated, it is observed in 
deceleration, generally when the driver is braking to 
avoid a collision with the vehicle ahead.  
• 
Vehicle lateral acceleration (m/s2). The maximum is 
calculated, it is observed when the driver performs a 
sudden maneuver. It generally measures the comfort 
of the lateral displacement needed to make the lane 
change.  
• 
Vehicle resulting acceleration: this is the absolute 
acceleration produced in the center of gravity of the 
vehicle. Its expression is: 𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑠= √𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑛𝑔
2
+ 𝑎𝑙𝑎𝑡
2 .The 
maximum is calculated. 
• 
Distance of lane change to the maneuver limit point 
(m). 
• 
Vehicle speed (km/h). The maximum is calculated. 
In this work the oculometric and verbatim are not addressed. 
IV. RESULTS  
In this chapter, we will first describe takeover processes 
and then check the hypotheses presented above. 
A. Takeover processes (sequence) 
No participant goes to minimum risk maneuver: without 
AR, all participants press button A; with AR, three 
1574

--- Page 5 ---
participants forget this action, all three in the first run, but as 
these three persons have their hands on the wheel, they go to 
MD. Most of the participants follow the process we expected: 
they first put their hands on the wheel, then press button A 
and finally activate a pedal. Only one participant without AR 
does not follow the process (he presses button A before 
gripping the wheel). With AR, in addition to the 3 who forget 
to press button A, 2 press the brake pedal less than 1s before 
they grip the wheel. All participants press the brake pedal, 3 
(1 without AR, 2 with) do not use the accelerator pedal, which 
is the pedal mostly used first (19 participants without AR, 15 
with). 
As soon as the TOR message appears (sound + iconic 
message on the classical HUD), the driver takes some time to 
put his hands on the steering wheel, press button A, depress a 
pedal, that is, to regain control over the commands. We 
describe the means (M) of these different reaction times and 
their standard deviations (SD) in table II: 
For each reaction time, an ANOVA is calculated with the 
following factors: participant (to take account of individual 
variability), condition, scene, and interaction between 
condition*scene. The relevant level of significance is 
determined by α=0.05. No significant influence is revealed for 
the reaction times listed in table II, which also indicates the p-
value calculated by the ANOVAs for the “condition” factor. 
TABLE II.  
TAKEOVER TIME SEQUENCE 
Variable 
Without 
AR 
With AR 
p-
value 
Duration between TOR and “hands 
on the wheel” 
M=3.12s 
SD=1.24s 
M=3.13s 
SD=1.42s 
0.645 
Duration between TOR and pressing 
button A 
M=4.63s 
SD=1.87s 
M=5.09s 
SD=2.58s 
0.24 
Duration between “hands on the 
wheel” and pressing button A 
M=1.49s 
SD=1.63s 
M=1.44s 
SD=1.36s 
0.262 
Duration between TOR and the first 
action on a pedal 
M=7.55s 
SD=4.47s 
M=8.95s 
SD=7.83s 
0.301 
Duration between “hands on the 
wheel” and the first action on the 
accelerator pedal 
M=4.63s 
SD=3.18s 
M=5.12s 
SD=3.25s 
0.872 
Duration between “hands on the 
wheel” and the first action on the 
brake pedal 
M=14.01s 
SD=10.65s 
M=11.68s 
SD=9.25s 
0.576 
B. Hypotheses 
1) Hypotheses 1&2: “Driver’s reaction is sharper after TOR 
than in MD (H1). AR minimizes this effect (H2)” 
ANOVAs similar to those described above are calculated. 
Post-hoc t-tests with Bonferroni-correction are calculated for 
all significant main effects of the factor variation. 
We first analyze the lateral control. The driver applies a 
noticeable movement on the steering wheel (more than 2°) 
sooner in MD after AD than in MD: the duration between the 
instant when the driver is back in MD and his action on the 
wheel is equal to 0.9s on average (AD with or without AR), 
compared to 4.8s in MD (duration between the navigation 
message and the noticeable effect on the wheel). The 
influence of the condition on this variable is significant 
(F(2,23)=15.1; p<.0001). The maximum steering rate is not 
influenced by the condition. Nevertheless the next figure 
shows that the spectrum of the steering rate has more energy 
at high frequency in MD after AD than in MD. In Figure 7. 
the average of spectra of the steering rate for all participants 
are represented; in red the participants are back in MD after 
AD and MD driving is represented in blue. 
 
Figure 7.  Average of spectrum of steering rate in MD and MD after AD 
To analyze longitudinal control, we first consider the 
accelerator pedal. The instant of the first action on this pedal 
appears much sooner in MD (0.3s compared to 8s on average 
in AD, with and without AR), which is obvious because the 
scenario on a highway with free traffic requires the driver 
constantly to accelerate in MD. The influence of the condition 
on this variable is very significant (F(2,23)=46.7; p<.0001). 
The intensity of this first action, the instant and the intensity 
of the maximum action on the gas pedal are not influenced by 
the condition.  
We secondly consider the brake pedal. There is no 
influence of the condition on the instant and the intensity of 
the first action, whereas the instant of the maximum action 
(pedal speed) is influenced (F(2,23)=7.88; p=.001): it is 
delayed in AD, with (25.4s) or without AD (27.5s), compared 
to MD (15.6s). Note that this action is mostly carried out after 
the lane change, in all conditions (except for 13% of the 
drivers on average), which means it is presumably performed 
to adapt to the slowing traffic in the destination lane. As the 
interaction condition*scene has an influence on the intensity 
of the maximum action on the brake pedal (F(4,21)=3.14; 
p=0.024), we have to consider each scene separately: 
conditions only differ in scene 1 where AD without AR (pedal 
speed=1237N/s) is significantly higher than MD (654N/s; 
p<.0001), and AD with AR (977N/s) is similar to AD without 
AR and to MD. We finally analyze the maximum vehicle 
speed: it is influenced by the condition (F(2,23)=7.63; 
p=.001), is higher in MD (96.2km/h) than in AD, where both 
with and without AR conditions are not significantly different 
(respectively 87.6 and 89.3 km/h). 
We analyze the effect of the driver’s control of vehicle 
behavior by means of the following variables: maximum 
value of longitudinal, lateral and resulting acceleration. The 
1575

--- Page 6 ---
condition influences neither the longitudinal (F(2,23)=2.51; 
p=.093) nor the lateral acceleration (F(2,23)=0.92; p=.404) 
but it slightly influences the resulting acceleration 
(F(2,23)=3.74; p=.032). MD presents the lowest value 
(8.0m/s2), AD without AR the highest (8.6m/s2), both 
conditions being different according to the post-hoc test 
(p=.009); AD with AR is in between (8.4m/s2), not 
significantly different from MD and from AD without AR. 
The main component of resulting acceleration is the 
longitudinal one, the maximum usually appearing when the 
driver brakes hardest, i.e. to handle the slowing traffic in the 
destination lane, as already mentioned. 
To understand how far the driver takes into account the 
surrounding traffic, we calculate the minimum time headway. 
It is not significantly different between conditions (1.97s in 
MD; 1.52s in AD without AR; 1.33s in AD with AR). This 
variable describes the driver’s behavior in respect of the 
vehicle in front. 
The following table (table III) summarizes the analyzed 
variables that are influenced by the conditions. A positive 
influence is marked in the column “MD vs. AD” when there 
is a significant difference between MD and AD with or / and 
without AR, that is between driving in full MD and driving in 
a similar situation in the MD phase that follows AD; 
“MD<AD” is written when the variable has a significantly 
lower value in MD than in AD with and without AR. A 
positive influence is marked in the column “with AR vs. 
without AR” when there is a significant difference between 
both HMI conditions in the MD phase that follows AD, or 
when one of these conditions is similar to MD whereas the 
other one is not. 
TABLE III.  
VARIABLES INFLUENCED BY THE CONDITIONS 
Variable 
MD vs. AD 
With AR vs. 
without AR 
Instant of the first action 
on the steering wheel 
AD<MD 
No influence 
Instant of the first action 
on the accelerator pedal 
MD<AD 
No influence 
Instant of the maximum 
action on the brake pedal 
AD>MD 
No influence 
Intensity of the 1st action 
of the maximum action on 
the brake pedal 
Influence in scene 1: 
AD without AR>MD 
Influence in scene 1: 
AD with AR=MD 
Maximum speed 
MD>AD 
No influence 
Maximum resulting 
acceleration 
AD without AR>MD 
AD with AR=MD 
2) Hypotheses 3&4: “After TOR, the driver has a higher risk 
of missing the exit / lane to take (H3). AR helps reduce this 
risk (H4)” 
In this part, we only consider the participants who realized 
after TOR the lane change to the destination lane: 50% in MD, 
as many drivers were already in the middle lane when the 
navigation message is displayed, 96% in AD without AR, 
92% in AD with AR. 
We first analyze the distance between TOR and the 
maneuver limit point, with and without AR. The condition 
influences this variable (F(2,23)=3.65; p=.039). The distance 
with AR (147m) is significantly higher (p=.004) than that 
without (86m). There is no influence of the factor 
condition*scene; nevertheless, if we look at the means by 
scene, we can see that the greatest difference appears in scene 
2 (224m with AR, 89 without). In scene 3, the difference is 
small (66m with AR, 64m without) because the distance 
available to perform the maneuver is limited by the exit size 
(85m). The following graph (Fig 8) summarizes these results, 
with means and 95% confidence intervals represented for 
each condition and scene. Confidence intervals appear as 
larger with AR, especially in scene1. This means that the 
trajectories differ amongst drivers more with than without 
AR. 
 
Figure 8.  
Distance to the maneuver limit point 
We also analyzed the duration between TOR and the 
instant when the driver activates the appropriate turn signal. 
The condition influences this variable (F(2,23)=10.53; 
p=.001). According to post-hoc tests, MD (4.7s) is 
significantly different from AD with (p<.0001) and AD 
without (p=.01), both last ones being similar. These results 
concern those drivers who activate the turn signal (85% in 
MD, 76% in AD without AR, 75% in AD with AR). 
The duration between TOR and the lane change into the 
appropriate lane (third lane for scenes 1 and 2, exit lane for 
scene 3) is also influenced by the condition (F(2,23)=16.87; 
p<.0001) 
but 
also 
by 
the 
factor 
condition*scene 
(F(4,21)=2.93; p=.04). We thus have to analyze what appears 
in each scene. According to the Bonferroni test, in scene 1, 
there is no significant difference between the conditions 
(average=14.1s). In scene 2, the lane change takes more time 
in AD without AR (22.1s) than in MD (5.6s; p<.0001); it also 
takes more time than in AD with AR (12.8s; p=.001); neither 
MD nor AD with AR conditions are significantly different 
(p=.064). In scene 3, the lane change takes more time in AD 
with AR (19.6s) than in MD (10.2s; p=0.001); AD without 
AR (18.4s) is not significantly different from MD (p=.003) 
and from AD with AR (p=.596). The following graph (Fig 9) 
summarizes these results, with means and confidence 
intervals represented for each condition and scene: 
0,00
100,00
200,00
300,00
scene 1
scene 2
scene 3
Lane change : distance to the maneuver limit point (m)
AD with AR
AD without AR
1576

--- Page 7 ---
 
Figure 9.  
Duration between TOR and lane change 
The following table (table IV) summarizes the analyzed 
variables that are influenced by the conditions: 
TABLE IV.  
VARIABLES INFLUENCED BY THE CONDITIONS 
Variable 
MD vs. AD 
With AR vs. without AR 
Distance 
to 
the 
maneuver limit point 
Not available 
with > without 
Instant of indicator 
use 
MD<AD 
No influence 
Duration 
between 
TOR and lane change 
Influence in scene 2: 
AD without AR>MD 
Influence in scene 3: 
AD with AR>MD 
Influence in scene 2: 
without>with 
Influence in scene 3: AD 
without AR=MD 
V. DISCUSSION 
A. Takeover  
As presented earlier, the takeover process is similar in both 
cases using AR or not. The majority of participants put their 
hand on the steering wheel, first, then press button A and 
finally push one of the vehicle pedals. As, before the TOR 
happens, the vehicle is cruising at the appropriate speed and 
in a straight lane, in general, the drivers take their time 
pushing the gas pedal so that the vehicle slows down by itself 
and is then at a greater distance from vehicles ahead. 
Comparing the results obtained with those of Lorenz [5] and 
Gold [19], the sequences of the takeover are similar, but the 
interval of time TOR-“hands on the wheel” is greater in our 
results: around 3.10s vs. [1.39, 1.85]s and [1.45, 1.79]s. This 
difference may be caused by the means used to distract the 
drivers when the vehicle is in AD or by the nature of the 
situation to handle in TOR: in our case there is no urgency, 
whereas there is an obstacle to avoid in Lorenz’s and Gold’s 
studies. 
One of the major results is that most of the participants take 
between 1 and 4s to put their hands on the steering wheel and 
between 2 and 5s to push button A to resume control, so that 
2s represents a minimum duration for the drivers to take over 
the driving. 
B. Comparison MD – AD 
The driver’s actions on the pedals and steering wheel after 
resuming control of the vehicle are sharper when they come 
back to the driving than when they were in MD. Therefore H1 
is validated. This is apparent from looking at the brake pedal 
and steering wheel speeds. The maximum brake pedal speed 
is increased. The vehicle dynamics is directly affected, so that 
the values of the accelerations, especially the resulting one, 
are greater than in MD, but the difference is not substantial. 
Both effects, on maximum braking speed and resulting 
acceleration, mostly occur when the driver has to take into 
account the slowing traffic in his destination lane, 
approximately 27s after TOR; this means that the influence of 
takeover on the driving behavior lasts quite a while.  
The driver’s behaviors can be interpreted thus: after 
resuming control, the drivers prefer to have a greater secured 
distance from the vehicles ahead and they react with more 
pressure on the brake pedal. 
The fact that the drivers take less than one second to turn 
the steering wheel by a significant angle after takeover can be 
seen as though the drivers are checking on the steering wheel 
to ensure they have control of the vehicle. 
The steering rate spectrum presents more energy at high 
frequencies (greater than 1Hz) in the case of MD after AD 
than in MD, which shows that, after resuming control, the 
drivers take moment to stabilize the lateral control of the 
vehicle. 
The lane change maneuver (indicator usage included) is 
delayed by the takeover process. Therefore H3 is validated. 
C. Influence of AR 
AR has no influence on the takeover: the reaction times to 
regain control over the commands (steering wheel and pedals) 
are not modified. This result is similar to those of Lorenz [5]. 
It could be expected that AR would help the driver take the 
time to look around and rebuild his situational awareness 
before he hands over, but it is not the case, at least in the first 
uses of the system. To know if some drivers develop the 
strategy to check mirrors and to analyze the environment, 
strategy being supported by AR, a longitudinal study has to 
be conducted. 
H2 is true for two variables, the resulting acceleration and 
the maximum braking intensity, as AR allows these variables 
to be reduced and to become not significantly different from 
MD. As such, AR seems to help the driver smooth out the 
control of his car, especially if the traffic slows down when 
he resumes control. To ascertain if this can be explained by 
the highlight on the vehicle in front, we have to analyze the 
verbatim that we collected during the interviews. 
Our results show that AR has a positive influence on the 
operational level of driving. 
To check if H4 is true, the variable “duration between 
TOR and lane change” does not seem to be relevant as two 
contradictory assumptions can be made: either AR could help 
the driver take time to understand the situation before making 
the lane change, or it could help him to perform the maneuver 
faster. The variable “distance to the maneuver limit point” is 
much more relevant. It is increased by AR, especially when 
the distance in which to make the lane change is not too 
constrained, for example to move to the appropriate highway 
lane at a highway split. As such, H4 is true: AR seems to help 
the driver become more aware of the lane change he must 
make and of the infrastructure constraints, by adding the 
0,00
10,00
20,00
30,00
scene 1
scene 2
scene 3
Duration between TOR and lane change (s)
AD with AR
AD without AR
MD
1577

--- Page 8 ---
information directly within the driving scene. The fact that 
AR modifies the driver strategy after taking over has already 
been demonstrated by Lorenz [5]. Other studies, conducted in 
MD, also show that AR allows the driver to better understand 
the direction to follow (cf. synthesis by Pauzié [7] or by Bark  
[20]). Lorenz shows that, in an emergency (obstacle 
avoidance), the driver’s trajectories, with the AR that 
highlights the trajectory to follow to avoid the obstacle ahead 
(“AR green”), lie closer together than without. Our results 
indicate that, in a less urgent use case, drivers’ distances to the 
maneuver limit points vary more with AR. As our objective 
was to warn about the constraint through our AR design, and 
not to suggest a trajectory to take, it is understandable that we 
get a different result from Lorenz and that our objective to 
give the driver free choice about the trajectory to take is 
fulfilled. 
In conclusion our results confirm that the tactical level of 
driving described by Michon [21]is also supported by AR. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
Our experiment shows that, with AR, the lane change 
maneuver is more anticipated and the driver’s action on the 
brake pedal is smoother, in the case where a lane change is 
needed to follow a navigation instruction and where attention 
is required to adapt to slowing traffic. We can consequently 
assume that AR helps the driver to rebuild his situation 
awareness when he has to take over quickly. The analysis of 
driving data reflects the driver’s actions. It should be 
completed by the analysis of the eye tracking data to give 
clues about what the driver has possibly detected and 
analyzed. Data triangulation (driving and ocular data 
completed by verbatim, cf. [22]), will give insights about the 
driver’s intentions, decisions and strategies, and about how far 
the driver could understand and anticipate the situation.  
Our results, obtained in a driving simulator with 
monoscopic projection, concern an AR that is perfectly 
superimposed on the environmental objects. In a real car, due 
to packaging constraints, AR images are usually projected at 
a fixed distance (e.g. 8 m) and so the superimposition is valid 
only in 2D. AR design should facilitate congruence [14] but 
will probably not be perfect [20], and so AR efficiency could 
decrease in a real car. In-vehicle testing is needed to answer 
these questions. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  A. N. H. T. S. ANHTS, "U.S. Department of Transportation Releases 
Policy on Automated Vehicle Development," Washington, DC., 
2013. 
[2]  N. Merat, A. H. Jamson, F. C.H, Lai, M. Daly and O. M. Carsten, 
"Transition to manual: Driver behaviour when resuming control from 
a highly automated vehicle," Transportation Research Part F, no. 27, 
p. 274–282, 2014.  
[3]  M. R. Endsley and E. O. & Kiris, "The out-of-the-loop performance 
problem and level of control in automation," Human Factors, vol. 37, 
pp. 381-394, 1995.  
[4]  J.-M. HOC, F. MARS, I. MILLEVILLE-PENNEL, É. JOLLY, M. 
NETTO and J.-M. BLOSSEVILLE, "Human-Machine cooperation in 
car driving for lateral safety : Delegation and mutual control," Le 
Travail Humain, pp. 153-182, 2006.  
[5]  L. Lorenz, P. Kerschbaum and J. Schumann, "Designing take over 
scenarios for automated driving: How does augmented reality support 
the driver to get back into the loop?," Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society, pp. 1681-1685, 2014.  
[6]  A. FELDHÜTTER, C. GOLD, S. SCHNEIDER and K. BENGLER, 
"How the Duration of Automated Driving Influences Take-Over 
Performance and Gaze Behavior," Kongress der Gesellschaft für 
Arbeitswissenschaft, p. 62, 4 mars 2016.  
[7]  A.Pauzié, Head up display in automotive: a new reality for the driver. 
Design, user experience, and usability: interactive experience design., 
Springer international publishing, 2015.  
[8]  Y. Liang and J. D. Lee, "Combining cognitive and visual distraction: 
Less than the sum of its parts," Accident Analysis and Prevention, pp. 
881-890, 2010.  
[9]  X.Chalandon., "Conscience de la situation: invariants internes et 
invariants externes," PhD thesis, 2007. 
[10] P. VERMERSCH, L’entretien d’explicitation, ESF, 1994.  
[11] L.Halit, A.Kemeny, A.Le-Gouguec, F.Mérienne and H.Mohellebi, 
"Head motion parallax effect on driving performances using an AR-
HUD: simulation study on Renault’s CARDs simulator," Driving 
Simulation Conference, 2015.  
[12] OKTAL, " SCANeR™studio," OKTAL, [Online]. Available: 
http://www.oktal.fr/en/automotive/range-of-simulators/software. 
[Accessed 23 february 2016]. 
[13] B.Soualmi, C.Sentouh, J.C.Popieul and S.Debernard, "Automation-
driver cooperative driving in presence of undetected obstacles," 
Control Engineering Practice, p. 106–119, 2014-24.  
[14] S.Langlois, T.NGuyen and P.Mermillod., "Virtual head-up displays 
for augmented reality in cars," European Conference for Cognitive 
Ergonomics, 2016.  
[15] R.Eyraud, E.Zibetti and T.Baccino, "Allocation of visual attention 
while driving with simulated augmented reality," Transportation 
research part F 32, pp. 46-55, 2015.  
[16] C.D.Wickens, J.Helleberg, X.Xu and W.J.Horrey, "Technical report 
ARL-01-14/NASA-01-7: Pilot task management: testing an 
attentional expected value model of visual scanning.," NASA-
Aviation Research Lab., 2001. 
[17] L.Pfannmüller, M.Kramer, B.Senner and K.Bengler, "A comparison 
of display concepts for a navigation system in a contact analog head-
up display.," Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics conference, 
2015.  
[18] V.Ng-Thow-Hing, L. K.Bark, C.Tran, R.Bhandari and S.Sridhar, 
"User-centered perspectives for automotive augmented reality," IEEE 
International Symposium on ISMAR-AMH, pp. 13-22, 2013.  
[19] C. Gold, D. Damböck, L. Lorenz and K. Bengler, "“Take over!” How 
long does it take to get the driver back into the loop?," Proceedings 
of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting , pp. 
1938-1942, September 2013.  
[20] K.Bark, C.Tran, K.Fujimura and V.Ng-Thow-Hing, "Personal navi: 
benefits of an augmented reality navigational aid using see-thru 3D 
volumetric HUD," in Automotive User Interfaces conference, 2014.  
[21] J. A. Michon, "A critical view of driver behavior models: what do we 
know, what should we do?. In Human behavior and traffic safety (pp. 
485-524). Springer US.," Human behavior and traffic safety, 
Springer US., pp. 485-524, Michon, J. A. (1985). .  
[22] C. Chauvin and S. Lardjane, "Decision making and strategies in an 
interaction situation: Collision avoidance at sea," Transportation 
Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, vol. 11, no. 4, 
pp. 259-269, 2008.  
 
1578
