--- Page 1 ---
 
A. Marcus (Ed.): DUXU/HCII 2013, Part III, LNCS 8014, pp. 393–400, 2013. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Efficient Information Representation Method  
for Driver-Centered AR-HUD System 
Hyesun Park and Kyong-ho Kim  
Electronics and Telecommunication Research Institute(ETRI),  
Daejeon, Korea 
{hspark78,kkh}@etri.re.kr 
Abstract. Providing a suitable and efficient representation of a driver’s pers-
pective is a way to reduce traffic accidents. In this paper, we first introduce a 
driver-centered AR (augmented-reality) HUD (head-up-display) system that su-
perimposes augmented virtual objects onto a real scene under all types of driv-
ing situations including unfavorable weather (such as rainy, foggy, overcast, 
and snowy) conditions. We next explain the scenario and method used in our 
comparative experiments on a method for improving both the cognitive usabili-
ty and visibility of drivers. For this, we comparatively analyzed not only infor-
mation display locations but also information representation for six information 
types using a driving simulator with thirty subjects. For the effects on safety, 
the situational driver awareness of safety-related road events was measured. To 
determine the differences in the visual cognitive workload placed upon drivers, 
we tracked their eye movements. The subjective workload of the participants 
was assessed using the RSME (Rating Scale Mental Effort). 
Keywords: Efficient Information Providing Method, Information Representa-
tion, Information Display Location, Driver Centered System, AR(augmented 
reality), HUD(head up display), Vehicle Simulator, Cognitive Usability, Visi-
bility, Subjective Workload. 
1 
Introduction 
1.1 
Motivation 
Necessity for the development of AR-HUD for Driving Safety. Popular vehicle man-
ufacturers around the world are currently commercializing HUD technologies as a 
part of their premium strategies. In 2001, the first HUD system was mounted into a 
GM Cadillac [1, 2]. Thereafter, HUD systems have been equipped mainly in  
advanced vehicles. BMW developed an LED-based HUD, which displays various 
information for driving safety such as the vehicle speed, driving direction, cruise con-
trol information, and a variety of warning messages [3,4]. However, all developed 
commercial HUDs do not provide by superimposing information between the real 
world and virtual ‘safety driving information’ like AR-HUD. Such HUD systems 
have a problem in terms of cognitive workload caused by a mismatch between virtual 

--- Page 2 ---
394 
H. Park and K.-h. Kim 
 
objects and the real scene. To solve this problem, GM has started the development of 
a full-windshield HUD system, which provides an augmented lane or road signs by 
superimposing virtual objects onto the real world seen through the windshield under 
conditions of poor nighttime visibility [5]. 
 
Importance of Information Type Provided. In an AR-HUD system, it is important to 
not only provide information suitable to the driver's field of vision, it is also very 
important to provide necessary information to the driver through an efficient informa-
tion representation. To improve driving safety and minimize the driving workload, the 
information provided should be represented in such a way that it is more easily un-
derstood and imposing less cognitive load onto the driver. It is therefore necessary to 
classify the characteristics of the information given, and find a way to represent the 
information according to these characteristics. In addition, research needs to be con-
ducted into both the amount of information that can minimize a driver's cognitive load 
and the types of representation that can minimize the driver’s visual load. 
1.2 
Hypothesis and Goals 
Hypothesis. The representation method used for each type of information differs de-
pending on the characteristics of the information. Therefore, we need to research a 
type of representation that allows for a faster recognition that is easy to understand. 
Thus, we divided the provided augmented safety information in the AR-HUD system 
into six categories, and displayed the various representation methods to suit the cha-
racteristics. In this case, we comparatively analyzed the experimental results of the 
driving performance, information comprehension, and driving workload based on the 
measured driver cognitive reaction rate, simulator-based driving variables (steering 
angle, brake, etc.), and driving workload. 
 
Goals. The goals we are trying to achieve in this work are as follows: 
─ How information representation in the AR-HUD affects driver performance. 
─ How information representation in the AR-HUD affects driver understanding. 
─ How information representation in the AR-HUD affects driver workload. 
2 
Driver-Centered AR (Augmented-Reality) HUD (Head-Up-
Display) System 
2.1 
Overview 
Figure 1 shows an overview of the proposed system, and figure 2 provides a system 
flowchart. The results in figure 1 show a detected lane, vehicle, and obstacle. The 
system is composed of five main modules: vehicle position estimation, 3D object 
recognition, view tracking of the driver, registration, and projection and display. 
 

--- Page 3 ---
 Efficient Information Representation Method for Driver-Centered AR-HUD System 
395 
 
 
Fig. 1. System overview (unseen situations under unfavorable weather conditions) 
2.2 
Description of the Sub-module  
Vehicle Position Estimation Module. This module estimates the 3D location of the 
vehicle using a GPS and an IMU. It then utilizes a 3D map DB from the 3D map ex-
traction sub-module. We use a modified Kalman filter to increase the rate of correct 
information provided [6].  
3D Object Recognition Module. This module detects ground-plane based obstacles 
from an input stereo image, and thereafter classifies the detected obstacles into pede-
strians or cars using an HOG (Histogram of Oriented Gradients) based SVM (Support 
Vector Machine) [7,8], and provides their distances during daytime conditions. Oth-
erwise, during the nighttime, it tracks obstacles out of visual range using a fusion 
between night-vision and radar technologies. This module then conducts a preprocess-
ing procedure, such as edge detection and noise elimination, from the input image 
sequence. 
Driver-view Tracking Module. This model detects the driver’s head location, esti-
mates the driver’s gaze, and thereafter calculates the driver’s viewpoint using a cam-
era equipped on the display housing device. For this module, it is assumed that the 
driver’s eyes are aimed in the same direction as their head. 
Registration Module. This module matches the 3D objects generated according to the 
driver’s perspective. To do so, this module receives 3D data integrated from the out-
put of each module, which are transformed into coordinates of the real world as 
viewed by the driver. 
Projection and Display Module. This module displays safety-warning and useful 
traffic information to the driver using a see-through HUD with an interactive design. 
 

--- Page 4 ---
396 
H. Park and K.-h. Kim 
 
 
Fig. 2. System flowchart 
3 
Comparative Experimental Design of an Efficient 
Information Representation Method for the Proposed  
AR-HUD System 
Experimental Design. We designed two objective experiments for the driving  
performance and cognitive usability, and one subjective assessment for driving satis-
faction. The first experiment was conducted to determine the effects on the driving 
performance and cognitive usability, and was implemented using a high-fidelity  
driving simulator. The second experiment was conducted to find the effects on the 
driver’s cognitive reaction when various types of information are provided. The sub-
jective satisfaction of each driver was measured using a psychology-based traffic 
questionnaire. 
Driving Simulator and Peripherals. A 3DOF motion-based, high-fidelity driving 
simulator was used in the experiment. The simulator provides force feedback and a 
rich 3D audio environment. Three channel displays for the front, left, and right 
screens provide a 130 deg. x 40 deg. full-scale field of view. The fully textured graph-
ics were generated using SCANNeRTM software, which delivers a 60 Hz frame rate 
at a 1024*768 resolution. The software can simulate various kinds of traffic scenarios 
such as the motion of nearby vehicles and pedestrians, and changes in traffic signals. 
Various kinds of vehicle data including the location, motion, velocity, acceleration, 
RPM, braking, and steering were collected by vehicle sensors at a rate of 50 Hz. A 
face LAB4.6TM eye-tracking system was installed on the dashboard of the simulation 

--- Page 5 ---
 Efficient Information Representation Method for Driver-Centered AR-HUD System 
397 
 
vehicle to track the driver’s head and eye movements. Figure 3 shows the experimen-
tal environment used. 
Dependent Variables. During the experiments, vehicle data, eye-tracking data, and 
video data were collected. The vehicle data were collected from the simulator and 
include the velocity, steering-wheel angle, accelerator and brake angle, and vehicle 
position and motion. Eye-tracking data include the head position and orientation, gaze 
orientation, gazing region, fixation time, and PERCLOSE. For verification of the 
data, video images from the camera were recorded. 
 
 
Fig. 3. Experimental Environment 
Scenario and Procedure. Each of the thirty participants drove the in-vehicle simula-
tor from start to destination for each information type provided in the AR-HUD sys-
tem, the order of which was counter balanced. During the experiment, the subjects 
were encouraged to adhere to the following guidelines: observe the traffic signals, 
maintain the speed limit indicated by the road signs, and avoid collisions with other 
vehicles or pedestrians. The driving route for the experiment was planned based on a 
real road in a 3D graphic scene database. We designed a total of fifty events for four 
types of routes. Table 1 describes the information type and representation of the de-
signed events. 
Subjective Assessment. Using multiple-choice questionnaires and RSME (Rating 
Scale Mental Effort) [9], the subjective satisfaction and preference for the information 
provided, and the cognitive workload were measured. 
Experimental Method for the Comparative Analysis. The representation of each type 
of information was determined based on the information attributes, driving situation, 
and driver characteristics. These predefined representations were divided into non-
representations and 3D visualization, and were analyzed using a pairwise comparison 
between the two. Figure 4 shows the A-route, which is one of the four routes used. In 
figure 4, E and the number listed next to it are an event and its sequential occurrence, 
respectively. The route used in the experiments is built using a 3D map. This route in-
cludes both an 80 km/h roadway and a footpath. S and F are the starting and final driv-
ing points, respectively. To perform each event, all participants drove down the same 

--- Page 6 ---
398 
H. Park and K.-h. Kim
 
path several different times
driving orientation and driv
type. Thus, E4, E9, E10, an
formation. In figure 4, the dr
Table 1. Informati
Information Type 
Ev
(Rou
Route 
(A
(A
Vehicle 
(A
(A
Pedestrian 
(C
(C
Lane Change 
(B
(B
POI 
(Point of Interest) 
(A
(A
.Traffic Sign 
(B
(B
                                            
1 We described the events of t
ing to the information type. 
m 
s. The arrow and number next to each event represent 
ving order. Events with the same color share the same ev
nd E15 are the same event type, i.e., pedestrian warning
riving starting point is E1, and route A finishes at E16. 
ion Type and Representation of the Designed Events1 
vent No. 
ute Type) 
Representation 
Attribute 
E1 
A-route) 
only audio 
Default 
E12 
A-route) 
3D Visualization 
(short upper arrow) 
E2 
A-route) 
3D Visualization 
(rectangle) 
E5 
A-route) 
Non-representation 
Default 
E4 
C-route) 
Non-representation 
Default 
E5 
C-route) 
3D Visualization 
(arrow at head position) 
E5 
B-route) 
3D Visualization 
(under arrow) 
E8 
B-route) 
Non-representation 
Default 
E3 
A-route) 
Non-representation 
Default 
E4 
A-route) 
3D Visualization 
(rectangle) 
E6 
B-route) 
Non-representation 
Default 
E6.5 
B-route) 
3D Visualization 
(rectangle) 
              
the representative comparison-pairs for the representation acc
the 
vent 
g in-
ord-

--- Page 7 ---
 Efficient Information Representation Method for Driver-Centered AR-HUD System 
399 
 
 
Fig. 4. Experimental Scenario 
4 
Conclusions and Future Directions 
To provide traffic information to drivers using an efficient method, we defined an 
information representation by considering both the driving situation and the drivers 
themselves. To prove the suitability of the representation, we also described the expe-
rimental design. The results of this experiment will support the effectiveness and va-
lidity of the AR-HUD system in the future as an effective representation method 
based on driver characteristics under complex roads or unseen environments such as 
those occurring during unfavorable weather conditions. For this, we will further ana-
lyze three different methods according to the experimental design described in this 
paper. The first method is a paired t-test, which compares the differences between 
non-representation and 3D visualization. The next method is a graph analysis to de-
termine the average distribution of the 30 subjects. Finally, a subjective preference 
and cognitive load will be measured through questionnaires. 
 
Acknowledgments. This work was supported by the Industrial Strategic technology 
development program, Development of Driver-View based in-Vehicle AR Display 
System Technology Development(10040927), funded by the Ministry of Knowledge 
Economy (MKE, Korea). 
References 
1. General Motors, http://www.gm.com/ 
2. Cadillac-Motor Trend Blog,  
 http://blogs.motortrend.com/manufacturer/cadillac/ 
3. BMW HUD (2009), http://Youtube.com  

--- Page 8 ---
400 
H. Park and K.-h. Kim 
 
4. BMW_Blog (2011), http://www.bmwblog.com/2011/10/10/ 
video-bmw-head-up-display-simulation-augmented-reality/  
5. GM’s full-windshield HUD technology (2010), http://Youtube.com  
6. Brown, R.G., Hwang, P.Y.C.: Introduction to Random Signals and Applied Kalman Filter-
ing, 2nd edn. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (1992) 
7. Xu, Y., Xu, L., Li, D., Wu, Y.: Pedestrian Detection Using Background Subtrac-tion As-
sisted Support Vector Machine. In: 2011 11th International Conference on Intelligent Sys-
tems Design and Applications (ISDA), pp. 837–842 (2011) 
8. Boser, B., Guyon, I., Vapnik, V.: A training algorithm for optimal margin classifiers. In: 
Fifth Annual Workshop on Computational Learning Theory. ACM Press (1992) 
9. Zijlstra, F.R.H., van Doorn, L.: The construction of a scale to measure subjective effort. 
Technical Report, Delft University of Technology, Department of Philosophy and Social 
Sciences (1985) 
