--- Page 1 ---
2351-9789 © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of AHFE Conference
doi: 10.1016/j.promfg.2015.07.678 
 Procedia Manufacturing  3 ( 2015 )  2722 – 2729 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 
ScienceDirect
6th International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics (AHFE 2015) and the 
Affiliated Conferences, AHFE 2015
A comparison of display concepts for a navigation system in an 
automotive contact analog head-up display
Lisa Pfannmüllera,*, Martina Kramerb, Bernhard Sennerb, Klaus Benglera
aTechnische Universität München, Institute of Ergonomics, Boltzmannstr. 15, 85747 Garching, Germany
bAUDI AG, 85057Ingolstadt, Germany
Abstract
Contact analog head-up displays (cHUDs) enable the presentation of augmented reality (AR) information in the driver’s primary 
field of view and are a promising display innovation in light of the increasing degree of assistance and automation in modern
cars. As cHUD technology still faces several limitations, robust and error-tolerant display concepts are required. Four design 
variations (cut-off, no cut-off, tilt, 2D) of two display concepts (boomerang, arrow) for contact analog navigation were realized in 
a mock-up setting in which the virtual cHUD image was overlaid on a video recording of a real driving scene. Thirty participants 
(within-subjects design) ratedattractiveness, positional accuracy, functionality, clearness/unambiguousness, distraction, quality of 
3D representation, interpretability, and intuitiveness. The results suggest that the variation tilt cannot be recommended for 
application in an automotive cHUD. The boomerang concept was preferred over the arrow concept. The results have important 
implications for the design of contact analog information in an automotive cHUD.
© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of AHFE Conference.
Keywords:Head-up display; Augmented reality; Contact analog; Driving simulator; Display concept; Navigation
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +49-89-289-15413; fax: +49-89-289-15389.
E-mail address: pfannmueller@lfe.mw.tum.de
© 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Peer-review under responsibility of AHFE Conference

--- Page 2 ---
2723
 Lisa Pfannmü ller et al. /  Procedia Manufacturing  3 ( 2015 )  2722 – 2729 
1. Introduction
Thenature of the driving task has been changed by the increase of assistance and information systems in the 
vehicle that are supposed to enhance safety and comfort while driving[1]. Although these systems aim at 
disburdening the driver, he isstill in charge of supervising these systems, their operations and correct functioning. 
Innovative display technologies play an important role inthe ergonomic implementation of the interaction between 
driver and vehicle in the context of increasing degrees of assistance and automation in modern and future 
automobiles. Conventional head-up display (HUD) technology is already implemented in many series vehicles of 
different manufacturers.Via a virtual image appearing in front of the car, HUDs enable the presentation of 
information in the driver’s primary field of view.This helps the driver monitor driving-related information, such as 
the speedometer orAdvanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) with minimum focal accommodation and eye 
movement effort, i.e., while keeping his eyes on the road, resulting insafety benefits such as reduced eyes-off-the-
road times and faster reaction times to unexpected traffic events[2–5].
A further stage of conventional HUD technology is the realization of augmented reality (AR) in the HUD, i.e., the 
combination of real and virtual information via the projection onto a transparent plane [6]. In a so-called contact 
analog head-up display (cHUD), information is still presented in the driver’s primary field of vision, but now
directly superimposed onto the real driving environment outside the car. By providing thisimmediate spatial context 
information, contact analogy in an automotive HUD is supposed to reduce the driver’scognitive effort required to 
interpret the information displayed and correctly transfer it to the traffic environment. AR cues have already been
shown to be efficient in directing the driver’s attention to and improving his detection of critical traffic events or 
objects [7–10]. Due to its intuitiveness andthe spatial information provided, AR information in an automotive 
cHUDmay help to increase situation and system awareness, and may improvethe understanding of ADAS such as 
ACC.
AlthoughcHUD technology seems to implynumerous advantagesover other information presentation approaches, 
there are several challenges to the successful implementation of an automotive cHUD.Deviations of the virtual 
information from the ideal location in the outside environment, due to imprecise sensor (e.g. GPS) or road map 
data,bear the risk of driver distraction and annoyance. Depending on the characteristics of the optical system, the 
driver’s sitting position, head posture, and movements,as well as pitch and yaw movements of the vehicle [11]may 
lead to displacements of the virtual image in relation to the driving environment. Package limitations constitute 
another challenge, as they determine the maximum display range of the virtual image. The resulting limitations,
especially in the horizontal plane, prevent information in the cHUDfrombeing displayed in contact analog manner 
across the whole windshield.Instead, the virtual information will either be cut off or has to renounce contact analogy 
at some point. Furthermore, adding virtual information to the real world within the driver’s primary field of vision 
may interfere with his perception of the traffic scene, reducing accuracy and increasing reaction times for the 
detectionof critical objects or events [12] due to masking, clutter, interposition, or divided attention.These limitations 
have to be considered when developing concepts for presenting information in an automotivecHUD.
Whereas the general optical quality of current cHUD systems has been subject to ongoing improvements, some of 
the technological limitations mentioned above will most likely not be eliminated in the foreseeable future. In light of 
these limitations, an optimized ergonomic concept for presenting information in the cHUD,with respect to or within 
the technological boundaries,becomes even more important. Potential display concepts should support the 
augmentation, aim at maximizing functionality, and intuitiveness while minimizing distraction or masking of 
(critical) real life objects.Although there are guidelines for the presentation of visual information in the vehicle 
[13,14], focused research on the design of display concepts for a cHUD has been scarce and,if at all, has mainly been 
realized in driving simulators with the virtual image of the cHUD directly integrated into the simulated driving 
environment, which doesnot precisely constitute an augmented reality but a virtual reality setting.  
In the current study, four design variations of two display concepts wereeach realized in an innovative mock-up 
setup in which the virtual cHUD image was accurately overlaid over a video recording of a real driving scene. The 
detailed description and illustration of the setup is given in the following.

--- Page 3 ---
2724  
 Lisa Pfannmü ller et al. /  Procedia Manufacturing  3 ( 2015 )  2722 – 2729 
2. Method
2.1. Participants
Thirty participants (seven women, 23 men, Mage = 32.9, SDage= 6.4, range = 22-52 years) took part in the study. 
All participants were employees of AUDI AG, recruited via an e-mail distribution list, with an average of 26,383 km 
driven per year. Fifty-seven percent of the participants were users of a conventional head-up display. All participants 
gave written, informed consent and did not receive any monetary compensation for their participation in the study.
All participants reported having normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
2.2. Experimental setup, display concepts and design variations
The experimental setup (see Fig. 1) consisted of a cHUD mock-up anda projection screen 10m in front of the 
mock-up. Video recordings of a real driving scene (driver’s perspective) were projected onto the screen (resolution 
1280 x 960 pixel). The virtual image of the cHUD (physical resolution: 858 x 600 pixel), starting at 12m in front of 
the mock-up, was superimposed on top of the driving scene. The setup resembled a driving simulator, but differed in 
that participants in the current study were not able to actively intervene in the driving process and the driving scene 
was not a simulation, but a video recording of a real drive. 
In the current study, two display concepts (boomerang vs. arrow) for a navigation system in a cHUD and four 
variations of each concept were implemented (see Fig. 2 and 3). In the four design variations, the navigation symbol 
(display concept: boomerang or arrow) was either (a) cut off by the limited display range when turning onto a street 
(cut-off), (b) not cut off (no cut-off), (c) tilted along its longitudinal axis when approaching the maneuver point (tilt), 
or (d) supplemented by a 2D (not contact analog) arrowwhen approaching the maneuver point (2D).
2.3. Procedure
All participants were presented with all four variations of the two display concepts. The order of the display 
concepts was randomized, but within each concept the variations were presented in a fixed order (a-d; see previous 
section) due to technical limitations. The recorded route on which the cHUD image was superimposed was the same 
for both display concepts, with an approximate length of 600 m passing through a residential area with little traffic. 
After having seen each variation of a concept, participants filled out a questionnaire, i.e., eight times in total. 
Fig.1.Experimental setup with cHUD mock-up andprojection screen.

--- Page 4 ---
2725
 Lisa Pfannmü ller et al. /  Procedia Manufacturing  3 ( 2015 )  2722 – 2729 
Fig. 2.Boomerang concept with the four different design variations: (a) cut-off, (b) no cut-off, (c)tilt, (d) 2D.
Fig. 3.Arrow concept with the four different design variations: (a) cut-off, (b) no cut-off, (c)tilt, (d) 2D.
a)
b)
c)
d)
a)
b)
c)
d)

--- Page 5 ---
2726  
 Lisa Pfannmü ller et al. /  Procedia Manufacturing  3 ( 2015 )  2722 – 2729 
In the questionnaire, participants rated attractiveness (“The design of the navigation symbol was attractive.”), 
positional accuracy (“The navigation symbols were displayed at the correct location in the environment.”), 
functionality (“The design of the symbols was functional.”), clearness/unambiguousness (“The navigation 
instructions provided by the symbols were clear, i.e., unambiguously comprehensible.”), annoyance (“The design of 
the symbols was annoying.”), distraction (“The design distracted me from the traffic.”), quality of 3D representation
(“The 3D representation of the navigation symbols was well recognizable.”), interpretability (“The design of the 
symbols required a high degree of concentration in order to interpret them.”), and intuitiveness (“The design of the 
symbols was intuitive.”) on a 5-point Likert scale with the endpoints fully disagree and fully agree.
3. Results
Two-way (Concept [boomerang, arrow] x Variation [cut-off, no cut-off, tilt, 2D]) repeated measures ANOVAs 
were calculated toanalyze all items separately. Greenhouse-Geisser corrections were applied in case of violations of 
sphericity.Post-hoc t-tests with Bonferroni-correction were calculated for all significant main effects of the factor 
variation. 
The arrow concept was rated significantly more ambiguous than the boomerang concept, F(1,28)= 4.84, p<.001, 
as well as more difficult/effortfulto interpret, F(1,28)=4.42, p=.003, and less intuitive, F(1,28)= 4.32, p=.003 (see 
Fig. 4). For all other items, no significant main effect of the concept was revealed.
The ANOVAs revealed a significant main effect of the design variation for the items attractiveness, F(3, 26) = 
25.09, p< .001, accuracy, F(3, 26) = 16.16, p< .001, functionality, F(3, 26) = 14.09, p< .001, 
clearness/unambiguousness, F(3, 26) = 8.64, p< .001, annoyance, F(3, 26) = 27.66, p< .001, distraction, F(3, 26) = 
18.71, p< .001, interpretability, F(3, 26) = 4.81, p= .002, and intuitiveness, F(3, 26) = 8.77, p< .001. The variations 
did not differ significantly from each otherwith respect to the quality of 3D representation.
As can be seen in Fig.5-7and the indicated results from the Bonferroni-corrected post-hoc t-tests, the variation tilt
was rated the least attractive, least accurate, least functional, most ambiguous, most difficult to interpret, and least 
intuitive compared to all other variations. The variations tilt and 2D were perceived as significantly more annoying 
and distracting than cut-off and no cut-off, as can be seen in Fig. 6 (b and c). 
Fig. 4.(a) Clearness/Unambiguousness: “The navigation instructions provided by the symbols were clear, i.e., unambiguously 
comprehensible.”;(b) Interpretability: “The design of the symbols required a high degree of concentration in order to interpret them.”; (c)
Intuitiveness: “The design of the symbols was intuitive.”

--- Page 6 ---
2727
 Lisa Pfannmü ller et al. /  Procedia Manufacturing  3 ( 2015 )  2722 – 2729 
Fig.. 5. (a)Attractiveness: “The design of the navigation symbol was attractive.”; (b) Positional Accuracy: “The navigation symbols were 
displayed at the correct location in the environment.”; (c) Functionality: “The design of the symbols was functional.”
Fig. 6.(a) Clearness/Unambiguousness: “The navigation instructions provided by the symbols were clearly/ unambiguously comprehensible.”;(b)
Annoyance: “The design of the symbols was annoying.”; (c) Distraction: “The design distracted me from the traffic.”
Fig. 7.(a) Interpretability: “The design of the symbols required a high degree of concentration in order to interpret them.”; (b) Intuitiveness: “The 
design of the symbols was intuitive.”

--- Page 7 ---
2728  
 Lisa Pfannmü ller et al. /  Procedia Manufacturing  3 ( 2015 )  2722 – 2729 
4. Discussion
In the current study, different display concepts and design variations for contact analog navigation in a HUD 
were compared in light of current technological limitations of automotive cHUD systems. Although participants 
were not actively driving, the advantage of the experimental setup over a driving simulator was the realization of an 
augmented reality scenario with the virtual image of the cHUD overlaid on the video recording of a driving scene. In 
most driving simulator studies, cHUDs arealso only simulated by integrating the symbols directly into the 
simulation environment.
Significant 
differences 
between 
the 
two 
navigation 
display 
concepts 
were 
only
revealed 
for 
clearness/unambiguousness, interpretability, and intuitiveness. For each of the three items, the boomerang concept 
was preferred over the arrow concept. One possible reason is that the continuous, extensive, and rather salient
arrowbears a greater risk of interferingwith the driver’s perception of the traffic scene than the string of boomerangs 
due to masking or attentional and cognitive capture [12,15].This should be verified in a future study, which also 
takes into account objective measures of driving performance and attention.
For eight of the nine items, significant differences between the design variations were revealed. All in all, the 
variation tilt received significantly worse ratings than all other variations. Only for distraction and annoyance,tilt 
and 2D were both rated significantly worse than the other two variations.Based on the current results, the variation 
tilt can, therefore,not be recommended for the application in an automotive cHUD. With respect to a 2D symbol in 
addition to the contact analog symbol, it is possible that this combination might have caused disadvantageous 
display clutter[5,15]. Whether it is sensible to temporarily replace the contact analog navigation symbol by a static 
2D representation in certain situations or to smoothly transform the 3D into a 2D representation is subject to further 
investigations.Interestingly, having the navigation symbol cut off by the horizontal borders of the virtual image did 
not have a negative impact on the ratings as might have been expected. It is possible that an additional animation/ 
movement of the virtual symbol such as the tiltmay have attracted the driver’s attention more strongly than the cut
due to the saliency of the movement[16]. Although animation can be purposefully used to direct attention e.g. to 
hazards, the animation in the context of navigation may have rather been perceived as distracting or annoying and 
may not have been intuitively understandable.This issue needs to be addressed in future investigations. 
In general, as in a conventional HUD, display clutter and highly salient, obtrusive design of the AR information
should also be avoided in a cHUD. Although a comparison of different cHUD display concepts for ACC has 
revealed surprisingly little differences between a minimalistic and a very salient, stimulating display concept 
concerning workload and standard deviation of the steering wheel[17], as virtual elements in the cHUD are
presented in the driver’s safety-critical primary field of vision, it is advised to only display informationsituationally
and if desired by the driver. 
5. Conclusion
All in all, future research should aim at developing and evaluating guidelines for the safe and ergonomic design 
of display concepts for automotivecHUDsagainst the background of the characteristics of the information to be 
displayed, as well as the technological and environmental limitations. As the current study only included subjective 
ratings as dependent measures and was conducted in a laboratory setting, the results need to be validated in a 
naturalistic driving study using also metrics for driving and navigation performance. Future investigations should
focus on the optimal design of different cHUD display concepts with respect to the driver’s attention, workload, and
driving performance, as well as usability and customer acceptance. While the current study focused on navigation 
only, the integration and prioritization of information from different ADAS needs to be addressed in future studies.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank icon incar for their graphical support.

--- Page 8 ---
2729
 Lisa Pfannmü ller et al. /  Procedia Manufacturing  3 ( 2015 )  2722 – 2729 
References
[1]K. Bengler, K. Dietmayer, B. Farber, M. Maurer, C. Stiller, H. Winner, Three Decades of Driver Assistance Systems: Review and Future 
Perspectives, IEEE Intell. Transport. Syst. Mag. 6 (2014) 6–22.
[2]R.J. Kiefer, Defining the "HUD benefit time window", in: Vision in vehicles - VI, Derby, England, North Holland, Amsterdam, New York, 
1998, pp. 133–142.
[3]K.W. Gish, L. Staplin, Human Factors Aspects of Using Head Up Displays in Automobiles: A Review of the Literature, Washington D.C., 
1995.
[4]R.J. Kiefer, Older Drivers' Pedestrian Detection Times Surrounding Head-Up Versus Head-Down Speedometer Glances, in: Vision in vehicles 
-VII, Marseille, France, Elsevier, Amsterdam, New York, 1999, pp. 111–118.
[5]W.J. Horrey, C.D. Wickens, A.L. Alexander, The Effects of Head-Up Display Clutter and In-Vehicle Display Separation on Concurrent 
Driving Performance, Proc. Hum. Fact. Ergon. Soc. Annu. Meet. 47 (2003) 1880–1884.
[6]R.T. Azuma, A Survey of Augmented Reality, Presence-Teleop. Virt. 6 (1997) 355–385.
[7]C. Ho, C. Spence, Assessing the effectiveness of various auditory cues in capturing a driver's visual attention, J. Exp. Psychol.-Appl. 11 (2005) 
157–174.
[8]M. Yeh, C.D. Wickens, Display Signaling in Augmented Reality: Effects of Cue Reliability and Image Realism on Attention Allocation and 
Trust Calibration, Hum Factors 43 (2001) 355–365.
[9]M.L. Rusch, M.C. Schall, P. Gavin, J.D. Lee, J.D. Dawson, S. Vecera, M. Rizzo, Directing driver attention with augmented reality cues, 
Transp Res Part F Traffic Psychol Behav 16 (2013) 127–137.
[10]M.C. Schall, M.L. Rusch, J.D. Lee, J.D. Dawson, G. Thomas, N. Aksan, M. Rizzo, Augmented Reality Cues and Elderly Driver Hazard 
Perception, Hum Factors 55 (2013) 643–658.
[11]M. Schneid, Entwicklung und Erprobung eines kontaktanalogen Head-up Displays im Fahrzeug. Dissertation, Munich, 2009.
[12]M.C. Schall, M.L. Rusch, J. Lee, D. Vecera, S.M. Rizzo, Attraction without distraction: effects of augmented reality cues on driver hazard 
perception, J Vis 10 (2010) 236.
[13]International Organization for Standardization, ISO 15008:2009,Road vehicles -- Ergonomic aspects of transport information and control
systems -- Specifications and test procedures for in-vehicle visual presentation 13.180; 43.040.15, 2009.
[14]Commission of the European Communities, Commission Recommendation of 26 May 2008 on safe and efficient in-vehicle information and 
communication systems: update of the European Statement of Principles on human-machine interface, Brussels, 2008.
[15]P.M. Ververs, C.D. Wickens, Head-Up Displays: Effect of Clutter, Display Intensity, and Display Location on Pilot Performance, Int J Aviat 
Psychol 8 (1998) 377–403.
[16]J. Wolfe, Visual Search, in: H. Pashler (Ed.), Attention, University College London Press, London, 1998.
[17]B. Israel, M. Seitz, H. Bubb, B. Senner, Contact Analog Information in the Head-Up Display – How Much Information Supports the Driver?, 
in: H. Khalid, A. Hedge, T. Ahram (Eds.), Advances in Ergonomics Modeling and Usability Evaluation, CRC Press, 2010, pp. 163–171.
