--- Page 1 ---
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hihc20
International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/hihc20
Inattentional Blindness in Augmented Reality
Head-Up Display-Assisted Driving
Yuwei Wang, Yimin Wu, Cheng Chen, Bohan Wu, Shu Ma, Duming Wang,
Hongting Li & Zhen Yang
To cite this article: Yuwei Wang, Yimin Wu, Cheng Chen, Bohan Wu, Shu Ma, Duming Wang,
Hongting Li & Zhen Yang (2022) Inattentional Blindness in Augmented Reality Head-Up Display-
Assisted Driving, International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction, 38:9, 837-850, DOI:
10.1080/10447318.2021.1970434
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2021.1970434
Published online: 30 Aug 2021.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 794
View related articles 
View Crossmark data

--- Page 2 ---
Inattentional Blindness in Augmented Reality Head-Up Display-Assisted Driving
Yuwei Wang, Yimin Wu, Cheng Chen, Bohan Wu, Shu Ma, Duming Wang, Hongting Li, and Zhen Yang
Department of Psychology, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou, China
ABSTRACT
Augmented reality head-up display (AR HUD) is a new technology in assisted driving, which can add 
extra information to the driving environment in real-time to help the driver better perceive road 
situation. AR HUD can enhance driving safety but may also encourage inattentional blindness. Hence, 
this study aims to examine whether AR HUD-induces inattentional blindness and determine whether 
workload intensifies their relationship. In experiment 1, 60 participants were randomly assigned to three 
groups and watched three types of augmented reality (AR)-augmented driving videos, respectively. They 
were instructed to respond to any critical events, but only their responses to road-crossing pedestrians 
were recorded. Results show that AR HUD reduces inattentional blindness when pedestrians are 
augmented but encourages inattentional blindness when pedestrians are not augmented. In experiment 
2, 20 participants viewed AR-augmented driving videos of high and low workloads. Pedestrians were not 
augmented in all videos. Result reveals that a high workload induces more inattentional blindness than 
low workload. The finding confirms that AR HUD induces inattentional blindness, and a high workload 
will intensify this relationship. The future design of the AR HUD assisted-driving system should consider 
the risk of inattentional blindness and come up with corresponding countermeasures.
1. Introduction
Augmented reality (AR) technology refers to a technology in 
which virtual information is added to the real environment 
through engineering and computer technologies. In addition, 
the real and virtual environments are synchronized in the 
same spatial relationship in real-time (Moussa et al., 2012). 
With the increasing maturity of AR technology, AR has been 
applied increasingly to everyday life, such as games, assembly, 
navigation, teaching, and medical surgery, offering substantial 
convenience for work, life, and entertainment. Studies in 
driving tried to combine AR technology and head-up display 
to create a novel approach to present information to drivers. 
Two types of AR HUD design exist according to the driver’s 
view perspectives, that is, screen-fixed AR HUD and world- 
fixed AR HUD, which are used for to different purposes. 
Screen-fixed AR HUD is suitable for presenting driving- 
related information not directly attached to real-world objects 
such as vehicle speed, and world-fixed AR HUD is suitable for 
augmenting real-world road objects and can be applied in 
wayfinding and hazard warning systems (Gabbard et al., 
2014). However, when applying world-fixed AR HUD to 
enhance road objects, the augmented objects may attract too 
much attention from drivers causing them to ignore “unpre­
dictable events” (e.g., the sudden appearance of pedestrians). 
In this case, the system failed to augment unpredictable sti­
mulus in time, thereby, inducing inattentional blindness.
Inattentional blindness is a phenomenon that the obser­
ver’s attention is shifted to other places, so even when looking 
at them, the observer fails to detect certain evident stimuli, 
which happens frequently and sometimes threatens people’s 
safety (Neisser, 1979; Neisser & Becklen, 1975). The AR tech­
nology application is often accompanied by inattentional 
blindness. Dixon et al. (2014, 2013) found that doctors using 
AR navigation technology experience more inattentional 
blindness during surgery than those who do not. AR technol­
ogy is also widely applied in a driving-assistance device. 
However, AR technology is not yet fully mature in the assisted 
driving field, and its advantages and disadvantages need 
further research and discussion. Special focus should be put 
on AR-induced inattentional blindness, which has been 
a major concern in the application of AR technologies and 
is closely related to road safety. Many studies in cognitive 
psychology found that the individual’s attention to the main 
task is the main cause of inattentional blindness. Moreover, 
researchers already discovered several factors that affect inat­
tentional blindness (Mack & Rock, 1998; Most et al., 2001; 
Simons & Chabris, 1999), including the location, shape, color, 
and size of unpredictable stimuli (Hyman et al., 2010; Most 
et al., 2001; Simons & Chabris, 1999), the eye movement 
effects (Beanland & Pammer, 2010b), previous experience of 
drivers (Beanland & Pammer, 2010a), and the difficulty of the 
main task (Cartwright-Finch & Lavie, 2007; Lavie, 1995). 
Some studies also found that although the incidence rate is 
relatively low, individuals still experience inattentional blind­
ness even without the main task. This finding further indi­
cates that the features of unpredictable stimuli can exert an 
influence on inattentional blindness (Davies et al., 2013; 
White & Caird, 2010). With regard to driving, although 
CONTACT Zhen Yang 
yangzhen@zstu.edu.cn 
Department of Psychology, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Qiantang District, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2021.1970434
© 2021 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION
2022, VOL. 38, NO. 9, 837–850

--- Page 3 ---
driving shares the same theoretical basis with the cognitive 
study on inattentional blindness, considerable differences still 
exist. Driving requires the drivers to control the car, con­
stantly pay attention to the surrounding environment, and 
adjust the trajectory and speed of the vehicle according to 
the surrounding environment. Each task is associated with 
driving safety and cannot be defined as the main task. That 
is to say, a driving task may be much more difficult than the 
full attention task in the cognitive study. In the inattentional 
blindness paradigm used in cognitive studies, participants 
only need to detect certain stimuli while performing rather 
simple main tasks (Mack & Rock, 1998; Most et al., 2005, 
2001). For example, in Mack and Rock (1998) study, partici­
pants needed to detect a simple geometric shape (unexpected 
stimuli) while discriminating the longer arm of a cross (main 
task). Moreover, Most et al. (2001) showed crosses on the 
screen (unexpected stimuli) while the participants were 
instructed to count the number of the letters showed on the 
screen simultaneously (main task).
1.1. Inattentional blindness in driving
Inattentional blindness during driving may cause serious con­
sequences, and thus, this topic has gained considerable atten­
tion from researchers. Existing studies related to blindness in 
driving mainly focused on the condition and factors that lead 
to inattentional blindness and were committed to eliminating 
such phenomenon in driving. With the evolution of automo­
bile equipment and technology, new study topics and meth­
ods continue to emerge.
Romer et al. (2014) proposed a model of sources of atten­
tion failures in novice drivers, which differentiates distraction 
and inattentional blindness based on whether driving-related 
tasks cause ignorance of road conditions. This model reveals 
that distraction is an attention failure caused by the driver’s 
attention shifting to other non-driving-related tasks, such as 
using mobile phones and talking. However, inattentional 
blindness means that the driver’s attention is focused on the 
driving task but still fails to notice key stimuli. White and 
Caird (2010) first distinguished looked-but-failed-to-see error 
(LBFTS) error from inattentional blindness. LBFTS error 
refers to a common phenomenon in driving that the driver 
looked at the target stimulus but failed to detect it, that is, he 
did not actually “see” it. They found that conversations during 
driving, particularly with attractive passengers, are more likely 
to trigger LBFTS, and extroverted drivers are more likely to 
experience LBFTS. Given that the driver’s sight is already on 
the target object when LBFTS occurs, they speculate that 
conversational distraction should be cognitive and has noth­
ing to do with the gaze situation. They thus believe that 
LBFTS should be regarded as a special kind of inattentional 
blindness that needs further exploration.
Early studies on inattentional blindness in driving nor­
mally adopted the conventional dual-task paradigm. They 
used a task that is non-related to driving tasks or even inter­
fering with driving as the main task, such as using a mobile 
phone or talking to passengers (Strayer et al., 2003; White & 
Caird, 2010). In Strayer’s experiment, no significant difference 
is observed in eye movement data between participants who 
used a mobile phone while driving and those who did not. 
However, participants’ memory toward specific objects who 
used a mobile phone was significantly reduced, indicating that 
using mobile phones can cause more inattentional blindness 
(Strayer et al., 2003).
Many researchers also studied the inattentional blindness 
of drivers while only completing driving tasks. Most and 
Astur (2007) conducted the first well-recognized study that 
explored inattentional blindness in driving. They found that if 
the color of the unpredictable stimuli is different from that of 
the stimuli the participant pays attention to, then the partici­
pant is more likely to experience inattentional blindness, and 
the response time is longer even when the participant notices 
the stimulus (Most & Astur, 2007). This finding is consistent 
with the conclusion drawn in a cognitive psychology study 
(Simons & Chabris, 1999).
In the studies of inattentional blindness in driving, the self- 
report of participants is one of the most common indicators, 
such as the score of recall, recognition, or forced-choice test 
(H. Kim & Gabbard, 2019; Pammer & Blink, 2013). However, 
self-report data may be lacking in investigating the influence 
of inattentional blindness on driving performance. Therefore, 
many studies adopted behavioral indicators. In the study of 
inattentional blindness in the driving, reaction time is intro­
duced through driving experiments using static mode (i.e., 
picture mode), video mode, and simulators as objective indi­
cators, including pressing a certain key when observing 
unpredictable stimulus or performing specific driving opera­
tions such as turn on lights or windshield wipers (Koivisto & 
Revonsuo, 2008; Murphy & Greene, 2015; Pammer et al., 
2015; Pammer & Blink, 2013; Yanko & Spalek, 2013).
1.2. Influencing factors of inattentional blindness in 
driving
The types and properties of unpredictable stimuli will affect 
inattentional blindness in driving. A study demonstrated that 
in driving, different unpredictable stimuli may result in 
a different incidence of inattentional blindness (Pammer 
et al., 2015). This finding is similar to the study of Mack 
and Rock (1998) whose result shows that the participants 
have a different sensitivity to different stimuli. Pammer and 
Blink (2013) also concluded that the consistency of accidental 
stimuli and the environment will affect inattentional blind­
ness. The unpredictable stimuli frequently used in the resent 
study include pedestrians (Murphy & Greene, 2015, 2016; 
Pammer et al., 2015; Pammer & Blink, 2013; Yanko & 
Spalek, 2013), motorcycles (Most & Astur, 2007), vehicles 
(Murphy & Greene, 2016; Yanko & Spalek, 2013), road signs 
(Kennedy & Bliss, 2013), and non-safety-related stimuli 
(Remington et al., 2014; Strayer et al., 2003). Among them, 
pedestrians are the most used stimuli. Pammer and Blink 
(2013) studied the impact of consistency between accidental 
stimuli and driving environment on inattentional blindness. 
Results show that in the urban environment, participants are 
more likely to experience inattentional blindness for kangar­
oos that do not match the environment than businessmen. On 
the contrary, in a rural environment, no significant difference 
is found between the two stimuli (Pammer & Blink, 2013). 
838 
 Y. WANG ET AL.

--- Page 4 ---
The experiment revealed that the consistency of accidental 
stimuli and the driving environment may affect the occur­
rence of inattentional blindness.
High workloads can also lead to an increase in inatten­
tional blindness. Kennedy and Bliss (2013) showed that even 
when only completing high-load driving-related tasks, parti­
cipants are very prone to inattentional blindness. Murphy and 
Greene (2015, 2016) also studied inattentional blindness in 
driving under different workloads via driving simulators and 
manipulating workloads through a target searching task and 
narrow gap driving task respectively. They found that drivers 
are more likely to experience inattentional blindness under 
high perceptual load because under the low perceptual load, 
the drivers paid additional attention to driving-related stimuli. 
By contrast, under the high perceptual load, the driver paid 
equal attention to driving-related and unrelated tasks. Their 
study also proved that no significant difference exists in the 
occurrence of inattentional blindness between unpredictable 
stimuli that appeared the first and second time. This result 
indicates that cognitive load, and not participants’ expecta­
tion, affects inattentional blindness.
However, the way to manipulate workload may lead to 
inconsistent results. For example, road familiarity is one of 
the most unique factors of inattentional blindness in driving. 
Researchers proposed that driving on familiar roads will 
encourage automated processing of road information that 
leads to low workload, some studies showed that driving on 
familiar roads leads to more inattentional blindness (Charlton 
& Starkey, 2013; Yanko & Spalek, 2013). This conclusion 
accords with De Fockert and Bremner (2011), in which low 
workload may also cause inattentional blindness. However, 
these results are contrary to that drawn by Kennedy and Bliss 
(2013) and Murphy and Greene (2015, 2016). In the present 
study, we speculate that this discrepancy of results may be 
attributed to the various manipulations of the driver’s work­
load (e.g., road familiarity in Charlton and Starkey (2013) and 
Yanko and Spalek (2013), subjective workload after completed 
the driving task in Kennedy and Bliss (2013), and driving 
through car gaps of different widths in Murphy and Greene 
(2015, 2016)). Hence, we used road complicacy to induce 
different workloads and asked participants to complete work­
load scales after completing all tasks as supporting informa­
tion in our study to ensure that we successfully manipulate 
participants’ workload.
1.3. AR HUD and inattentional blindness
The AR assistance in driving can be divided into visual, 
auditory, and tactile support according to the different sen­
sory channels, and all forms have been put into use in certain 
areas of driving (S. Kim & Dey, 2016). Most of the driving 
information is obtained through visual perception. Visual 
perception can accurately seize long-distance information 
and the direction, trajectory, and speed of the vehicle. 
Nowadays, the AR HUD is widely used in AR-assisted driv­
ing. In addition, AR HUD integrates AR information in the 
conventional HUD by projecting real-time driving informa­
tion on the HUD, thereby providing the driver with additional 
information from the first perspective (Ng-Thow-Hing et al., 
2013). Moreover, AR HUD can enhance the driver’s visibility 
of important events on the road and may also enhance the 
driver’s situational awareness. AR HUD is also suitable for 
drivers of different ages (Ng-Thow-Hing et al., 2013). Hwang 
et al. (2016) proved that AR HUD can enhance the driver’s 
risk perception and reduce the driver’s anxiety level.
However, AR HUD has certain disadvantages. When HUD 
was first applied in the aerospace field, many studies have 
found that HUD can bring about a phenomenon named 
“attention tunnel” (Karar & Ghosh, 2012). Attention tunnel 
refers to missed events caused by a slight mismatch of atten­
tion between the HUD and the external scenery (Karar et al., 
2015). This phenomenon can be regarded as inattentional 
blindness in driving. One view is that HUD may separate 
the attention of pilots from the real environment. In other 
words, pilots tend to ignore unpredictable stimuli when pay­
ing attention to the information on HUD (Moodi, 1995).
A similar phenomenon exists in the field of automobile driv­
ing. Gabbard et al. (2014) proposed that when driver pays addi­
tional attention to the information displayed on the windshield 
by HUD, they tend to ignore information in the real environ­
ment. They suggested that the role of AR HUD in driving has 
three levels: (1) guiding the driver to perceive the surrounding 
environment and operate the vehicle, including wayfinding, 
heading control, speed control, and distance control with other 
vehicles and objects; (2) guiding the driver to operate some 
functions that are more relevant to the driving task, such as 
turning on the turn signal lights and adjusting the wiper; (3) 
guiding the driver to complete the adjustment and entertain­
ment functions, such as adjusting the air conditioning, informa­
tion display, and other entertainment functions (Gabbard et al., 
2014). The importance of these three levels decreases in order. 
Gabbard et al. (2014) suggested that if the second and third levels 
of AR HUD attract excessive attention from the drivers, then 
they can easily ignore the stimuli in the real driving environ­
ment, resulting in safety hazards.
Although previous studies provided evidence that AR 
HUD introduces inattentional blindness, most of them 
focused on “distraction” (Romer et al., 2014). That is, non- 
driving-related tasks in AR HUD-assisted driving cause dri­
vers to ignore unpredictable stimuli.
The factors that cause attention failure in the HUD may also 
cause attention failure in the AR HUD. However, few related 
studies focused on the factors influencing inattentional blindness 
in AR HUD. Oh et al. (2016) suggested that the superposition of 
HUD on unpredictable stimuli in the real world may cause 
additional attention tunnel, that is, more inattentional blindness. 
Some researchers were committed to improving AR HUD to 
make it a better assistant for drivers. H. Kim et al. (2016) 
provided the drivers with the distance information between the 
vehicle and the critical event through AR HUD, which effectively 
reduced inattentional blindness. Then, Schwarz and Fastenmeier 
(2017) proved that using AR technology to provide the subjects 
with visual information by describing the accident ahead in 
detail can reduce the subject’s time to shift their attention back 
to the road. In a recent study, H. Kim and Gabbard (2019) used 
driver’s gaze behavior and situational awareness as quantifiable 
indicators of inattentional blindness in AR HUD-assisted driv­
ing, providing a new method to evaluate the AR HUD interface. 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 
 839 

--- Page 5 ---
They concluded that using a conformal graphic (e.g., a bounding 
box) to augment stimulus will encourage inattentional blindness 
toward non-augmented environmental elements. However, Kim 
and Gabbard only augmented pedestrians in their study, exclud­
ing other important safety-critical elements, such as road signs. 
Unpredictable stimuli, such as pedestrians, are easily omitted by 
the system due to their unpredictability and current technical 
restraints. Thus, future studies need to explore conditions when 
unpredictable stimuli are not augmented in AR HUD-assisted 
driving to come up with corresponding countermeasures.
In summary, AR HUD should try to provide drivers with 
more appropriate and efficient information to prevent traffic 
accidents. However, many studies showed that AR HUD may 
lead to more inattentional blindness. At present, only a few 
studies focused on the blindness caused by HUD, and even 
less research explored the impact of AR HUD on inattentional 
blindness. The AR bounding box used in AR HUD can direct 
the driver’s attention. This bounding box is designed to attract 
the driver’s attention to the augmented stimuli, which may 
induce inattentional blindness toward non-augmented stimuli 
(i.e., unpredictable stimuli in some situations). Moreover, 
existing studies showed that the characteristic of stimuli and 
cognitive load are associated with inattentional blindness. 
However, no study has examined the effect of cognitive load 
on inattentional blindness in the context of AR HUD display. 
Therefore, the influence of augmented condition and cogni­
tive load on the occurrence of inattentional blindness in the 
AR HUD driving task needs to be explored.
The present study focuses on inattentional blindness in AR 
HUD-assisted driving tasks by exploring its forming condition 
and influencing factors through two experiments. The present 
study mainly aims to improve the AR HUD design and reduce 
inattentional blindness. The objectives of the study are as follows:
(1) Explore whether the application of AR-assisted dis­
play in-car driving will induce more inattentional 
blindness. In experiment 1, some contingencies (i.e. 
the unpredictable event that has not been augmented 
by AR) were added in driving routes to induce the 
potential inattentional blindness when the drivers use 
the AR HUD during driving.
(2) Explore whether cognitive load affects the occurrence 
of inattentional blindness in AR HUD-assisted driving. 
In experiment 2, we set two driving scenarios with 
different complexities of the driving environment to 
induce different levels of cognitive load in driving.
Accordingly, this study proposes the following hypothesis: 
Drivers using AR HUD without augmented pedestrian (AR 
HUD-NP) will experience the highest level of inattentional 
blindness in a higher workload condition.
2. Experiment 1
2.1. Objectives
This study aims to explore whether AR HUD is used and 
whether unpredictable stimuli are augmented by AR HUD 
will increase inattentional blindness in driving tasks. In this 
experiment, the driving situations were divided into two 
types: with AR HUD and without AR HUD. Considering 
the large uncertainty of unpredictable stimuli, the existing 
AR HUD systems may not detect and augment the unpredict­
able stimuli in time. The unpredictable stimuli refer to the 
events that occur unpredictably to the drivers, such as the 
sudden appearance of a pedestrian. Thus, AR HUD condi­
tions were further divided into AR HUD with and without 
augmented unpredictable stimuli conditions to investigate the 
potential effect of different augmented conditions of AR HUD 
on driving inattentional blindness.
Thus, this experiment explored the effects of augmented 
conditions, including No AR HUD, AR HUD with augmented 
unpredictable stimuli, and AR HUD without augmented 
unpredictable stimuli, on inattentional blindness in driving.
2.2. Methods
2.2.1. Participants
We recruited 60 licensed drivers with normal to corrected-to- 
normal vision. The average age of the participants was 
20.94 years old (SD = 2.32), their average driving experience 
is 3.15 years (SD = 1.35), and their average mileage is 362 km. 
All participants provided written informed consent and were 
compensated for their participation.
2.2.2. Experimental equipment
This study used a driving simulator consisted of a driving 
simulator 
software 
(STISIMDRIVE 
M100K, 
Systems 
Technology Inc., Hawthorne, CA, USA), an operating system 
(Logitech MOMO, Newark, CA, USA) with a steering wheel, 
an accelerator, and brake pedals, two computers, and an 
INTECH IWB 72-inch LED screen with 1,920 × 1,080 px 
resolution is used in our study. The LED screen was approxi­
mately 1.5 m away from participants vertically.
All virtual sceneries were created on the STISIM 3 program 
and were projected on the LED screen. An SMI RED-m 
portable eye tracker was used to record participants’ eye 
movements at a sampling frequency of 30 Hz. The eye move­
ment data were analyzed using the SMI system software iView 
3.5 and BeGaze 3.5.
The laboratory is an independent room of 25 m2. The 
simulation car is set in the center of the room. The windshield 
is installed to make the driving environment more realistic. 
The cardboards are installed on both sides of the seats, and 
the LED screen is placed near the wall.
2.2.3. Materials
In the present study, we used driving videos generated with 
a medium-fidelity driving simulator to create a naturalistic 
driving experience. However, we cannot directly augment 
target stimuli in the driving simulator due to technical limita­
tions. Thus, we adopted video materials used by Oh et al. 
(2016). To create the video footage, a licensed experimenter 
completed the driving tasks in the SITSIM driving simulator, 
and we captured the video footage through screen recording.
We created 10 videos in total. In the videos, the ego-car 
drove on a 2 km-long four-lane motorway at a constant speed 
of 65 km/h. We added various road elements, such as curves, 
840 
 Y. WANG ET AL.

--- Page 6 ---
interactions with traffic lights, buildings, trees, road signs, 
vehicles, and pedestrians, to the scenarios to create a natural 
and realistic driving experience for drivers. We also added 
four types of critical events to the scenarios: (1) speed of the 
ego-car exceeding the speed limit (occurred two times), (2) 
the ego-car running a red light (occurred 2 times), (3) the 
ego-car driving too close to lead vehicles (occurred two 
times), and (4) pedestrian in front of the ego-car crossing 
the road (occurred six times). In all videos, the ego-car will 
not avoid any critical events. However, no collision would 
occur according to the system setting. All road elements and 
road events appeared at a random distance on the road.
2.2.4. Experimental variables and design
This experiment was a single-factor between-subject design in 
which three groups of participants need to experience different 
augmented conditions. The independent variable was augmen­
ted condition: (1) No AR HUD condition, (2) AR HUD without 
augmented pedestrian (AR HUD-NP) condition, (3) AR HUD 
with augmented pedestrian (AR HUD-P) condition. In this 
stidy, we use the No AR HUD condition as a baseline for driver 
behavioral and eye movement measurements.
To create a prototype of AR interfaces, we used a video- 
editing tool to overlay bounding boxes (i.e., the AR graphics) 
atop the driving videos. Table 1 shows the designing detail 
and demonstration graph of each augmented condition.
The dependent variables were the occurrence of inatten­
tional blindness, types of inattentional blindness, reaction 
time without blindness, and subjective workload. We adopted 
White and Caird (2010) operational definition of inattentional 
blindness, that is, drivers do not respond when the pedestrian 
is in the center of the windshield. Then we divided inatten­
tional blindness into ordinary blindness and looked-but-failed 
-to-see error (LBFTS error) according to eye movement data 
(White & Caird, 2010) (Table 2). Ordinary blindness means 
that the participant neither looked at the pedestrian (gaze 
dwell time under 100 ms) nor responded to it. LBFTS error 
means that participants looked at pedestrians (gaze dwell time 
is and above 100 ms) without responding to it. The sampling 
frequency of the eye tracking device is 30 Hz, so 100 ms is 
approximately three consecutive video frames after pedes­
trians were in the center point of the windshield. The reaction 
time without blindness was defined as the interval time 
between the onset of the pedestrian’s movement and the 
participant pressing the button. The workload is measured 
using the NASA Task Load Index (NASA-TLX) scale (Hart & 
Staveland, 1988), which includes six dimensions of workload 
(overall performance, frustration, effort, mental, physical, and 
temporal demand of a task). We used a weighted average TLX 
score as the workload indicator.
Pammer et al. (2015) noted that the types of unpredictable 
stimuli will affect inattentional blindness. Therefore, we only 
used pedestrians as unpredictable stimuli in our study. The 
Governors Highway Safety Administration (GHSA) reported 
that the number of pedestrian fatalities in the United States 
has grown sharply in recent years (Governors Highway Safety 
Association, 2019). Thus, GHSA calls for engineering coun­
termeasures to reduce pedestrian fatality. A report by Britain’s 
Department of Transport shows that drivers failing to detect 
pedestrians accounted for 15% of pedestrian fatality 
(Department for Transport, 2019). Moreover, the current 
AR HUD designs have not reached a consensus on whether 
and how to augment pedestrians (Hwang et al., 2016; Karar 
et al., 2015; H. Kim & Gabbard, 2019; Langlois & Soualmi, 
2016; Park & Kim, 2013; Park et al., 2013). Therefore, we 
choose pedestrians as our unpredictable stimuli.
Table 1. Designing details and demonstration graphs of three augmented conditions.
Types of augmented condition
Designing detail
Demonstration graph
No AR HUD
We did not augment anything in this condition.
AR HUD without augmented 
pedestrian (AR HUD-NP)
We augmented road signs, traffic lights, and lead vehicles with bounding boxes, 
but we did not augment unpredictable pedestrians in this condition.
AR HUD with augmented 
pedestrian condition (AR 
HUD-P)
We augmented road signs, traffic lights, lead vehicles, and unpredictable 
pedestrians in this condition.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 
 841 

--- Page 7 ---
2.2.5. Procedure
The participants read and signed an informed consent form 
and completed a demographic questionnaire. The experimen­
ter helped participants wear and calibrate the eye tracker 
using a three-point calibration mode of eye-tracking device. 
That is, participants gazed at three random locations in the 
front view, and the experimenter clicked the corresponding 
locations in the eye-tracking monitor to adjust the gaze point.
The experimenter also helped participants adjust the height 
of the chair to ensure that their eye sights were right in the 
center of the HUD display (the experimenter can observe 
participant’s eyesight through the eye-tracking monitor).
We told the participant to imagine being the driver when 
watching these first-person-view videos. We also instructed 
them to press the designated buttons whenever they noticed 
a critical event in the videos, such as overspeeding, running 
a red light, being too close to the lead vehicle, or pedestrians 
crossing the road. We required participants to respond to all 
critical events because we want to prevent them from antici­
pating the pedestrians. That is, participants needed to press 
the button when they noticed the following: (1) the ego-car 
exceeded the speed limit, (2) the ego-car ran a red light, (3) 
the distance between the ego-car and the lead car was too 
close, (4) a participant in front was crossing the road. 
However, only the data of participants responding to pedes­
trians were used for analysis.
The participants first completed two practice trials. In the 
practice trials, all road settings were the same as the formal 
experiment. Moreover, critical events, such as overspeeding, 
running a red light, and leading vehicle decelerating (i.e., 
being too close to leading vehicles), were all included. 
However, unpredictable stimuli (i.e., pedestrians crossing the 
road) are excluded.
After practice, participants were randomly assigned to 
three groups and they were to watch three types of AR- 
augmented driving videos, respectively. Each group completed 
10 formal trials (i.e., viewed 10 videos). Among these, six trials 
contained pedestrians’ road-crossing events. The presentation 
order of 10 videos was counter-balanced by Latin squares. 
When participants complete one trial, the next trial automa­
tically started on the basis of the system setting.
After completing all experimental trials, the participants 
were asked to complete the NASA-TLX scale to measure their 
overall workload of completing the entire experiment.
2.3. Results
2.3.1. Data processing
The occurrence of inattentional blindness is based on drivers’ 
response (response or no response). We coded the result as no 
blindness if participants responded to unpredictable pedes­
trians and inattentional blindness if they responded. The type 
of inattentional blindness was calculated based on eye move­
ment data. We used unpredictable stimuli (i.e. pedestrians) as 
the area of interest (AOI) to analyze the gaze dwell time of the 
participants. We coded the result as LBFTS blindness if their 
gaze dwell time on the AOI was longer than three frames 
(100 ms at 30 Hz sample frequency) and they failed to press 
the button to respond (White & Caird, 2010). We coded the 
result as the ordinary inattentional blindness if the partici­
pants’ gaze dwell time on the AOI was less than three frames 
and they failed to press the button (Table 2). Reaction time 
without blindness equals the exact time the participants press 
the brake pedal minus the exact time the unpredictable 
showed up. When analyzing the brake time pedal, we 
excluded the data when the participant did not press the 
brake pedal. For the NASA-TLX score, we asked the partici­
pants to finish two parts of the questionnaire. We multiplied 
the weighted score (the score derived from the second part of 
the questionnaire) and the scale score (the score derived from 
the first part of the questionnaire) and divided it by 15 to 
obtain our final workload score.
2.3.2. Occurrence of inattentional blindness
This experiment had 348 valid trials where we observed inat­
tentional blindness in 168 trials. However, we excluded three 
trials, accounting for 1.78% of the total inattentional blindness 
trial, as their eye movement data were missing due to techni­
cal problems. Thus, we had 165 valid inattentional blindness 
trials for further analysis.
IBM SPSS Statistics 26.0 was used to analyze the experi­
mental data. In the present study, the occurrence of inatten­
tional blindness and the type of inattentional blindness were 
discrete and non-linear data. Thus, we adopted the general­
ized linear model (GLM) for data analysis. GLM is suitable for 
discrete data as it allows using a link function to connect the 
linear model to the non-normally distributed response vari­
able. To reach consistency in data analysis, we also used GLM 
to analyze reaction time and NASA-TLX data.
We used the occurrence of blindness as the dependent 
variable and the augmented condition as the factor to perform 
GLM. We used binary logistic regression as the link function. 
The result showed that the effect of augmented condition on 
the occurrence of inattentional blindness was significant (χ2 
(2) = 21.484, p< .001). The GLM parameter estimates results 
showed that compared with the AR HUD-P condition, the No 
AR HUD (χ2(1) = 6.554, p< .01) and the AR HUD-NP con­
ditions (χ2(1) = 21.453, p< .001) significantly increased the 
incidence of inattentional blindness (Table 3). We further 
conducted the GLM post hoc test to compare the incidence 
of inattentional blindness between AR HUD-NP and No AR 
HUD conditions (we used Bonferroni correction for multiple 
comparisons). The result showed that the AR HUD-NP con­
dition had a marginally higher proportion of inattentional 
blindness No AR HUD condition (p = .087) (Figure 1a).
2.3.3. Type of inattentional blindness
We used the type of blindness as the dependent variable and 
the augmented condition as the factor to perform GLM. We 
Table 2. Classification of no blindness, ordinary blindness, and LBFTS error.
Response
Yes
No
Gaze dwell time
≥100 ms
Look and respond
LBFTS error
<100 ms
Not look but respond
Ordinary blindness
No blindness = Look and respond + Not look but respond; Inattentional 
blindness = LBFTS error + Ordinary blindness. 
842 
 Y. WANG ET AL.

--- Page 8 ---
used binary logistic regression as the link function. The result 
showed that the augmented condition significantly impacted 
the type of inattentional blindness (χ2(2) = 10.493, p< .01). 
The GLM parameter estimates results showed that compared 
with the AR HUD-P condition, the incidences of LBFTS error 
were significantly lower in No AR HUD and AR HUD-NP 
conditions (χ2(1) = 4.303, p< .05; χ2(1) = 10.487, p< .001) 
(Table 3). We conducted the GLM post hoc test to compare 
the incidence of LBFTS error between AR HUD-NP and No 
AR HUD conditions (Bonferroni correction). We observed no 
difference between AR HUD-NP and No AR HUD conditions 
(p> .05) (Figure 1b). Notably, although the proportion of 
LBFTS errors in the AR HUD-P condition was significantly 
higher than that of the other two groups. However, the fre­
quency of LBFTS in the three groups was very similar (n(No 
AR HUD) = 27, n(AR HUD-NP) = 28, n(AR HUD-P) = 27). 
Thus, the frequencies of ordinary blindness in the No AR 
HUD (n = 28) and the AR HUD-NP (n = 46) conditions were 
significantly higher than those of the AR HUD-P (n = 11) 
condition.
2.3.4. Reaction time without blindness
We used reaction time without blindness as the dependent 
variable and the augmented condition as the factor to perform 
GLM. We used the linear model as the link function. The 
result showed that the augmented condition significantly 
impacted reaction time without blindness (χ2(2) = 13.490, 
p< .001). The GLM parameter estimates results showed that 
compared with the AR HUD-P condition, the reaction time 
was significantly longer in the No AR HUD condition (χ2 
(1) = 12.632, p< .001). No difference was observed between 
AR HUD-P and AR HUD-NP conditions (χ2(1) = 0.268, 
p> .05) (Table 3). The GLM post hoc test results 
(Bonferroni correction) showed that reaction time was 
Figure 1. (a) Incidence of inattentional blindness, (b) incidence of two types of blindness, (c) reaction time without blindness (mean and standard error), and (d) 
NASA-TLX score (mean and standard error) under different augmented condition.
Table 3. Effect of augmented condition on behavior performance and NASA-TLX score.
Dependent Variable
Augmented condition
B
SE
Wald χ2
p
OR
95% CI OR
The occurrence of inattentional blindness
No AR HUD
−0.697
0.272
6.554
.010**
0.498
[0.292, 0.849]
AR HUD-NP
−1.275
0.275
21.453
.000***
0.280
[0.163, 0.479]
AR HUD-P
Type of inattentional blindness
No AR HUD
0.936
0.451
4.303
.038*
2.549
[1.053, 6.170]
AR HUD-NP
1.394
0.431
10.487
.001***
4.032
[1.734, 9.377]
AR HUD-P
Reaction time without blindness
No AR HUD
111.655
31.4158
12.632
.000***
3.10E+48
[5.62E+21, 1.71E+75]
AR HUD-NP
18.5
35.7514
0.268
.605
1.08E+08
[4.01E-23, 2.93E+38]
AR HUD-P
NASA-TLX
No AR HUD
6.061
4.1977
2.085
.149
428.733
[0.115, 1.60E+06]
AR HUD-NP
−3.53
4.1977
0.707
.400
0.029
[7.83E-06, 109.633]
AR HUD-P
*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001. 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 
 843 

--- Page 9 ---
significantly longer in the No AR HUD condition compared 
with the AR HUD-NP condition (p< .05). However, no dif­
ference existed between the two AR HUD conditions (p> .05) 
(Figure 1c).
2.3.5. Subjective workload
We used the NASA-TLX score as the dependent variable, the 
augmented condition as the factor to perform GLM. We 
used the linear model as the link function. The result 
showed that the impact of the augmented condition on 
subjective workload was of marginal significance (χ2 
(2) = 5.630, p = .06). The GLM parameter estimates results 
showed that no significant difference existed among No AR 
HUD, AR HUD-NP, and AR HUD-P conditions in terms of 
subjective workload (ps > .05) (Table 3). The GLM post hoc 
test (Bonferroni correction) showed that the subjective work­
load in the No AR HUD condition was marginally signifi­
cantly higher than the AR HUD-NP condition (p = .057). 
No difference was observed between the two AR HUD con­
ditions (p> .05) (Figure 1d).
3. Experiment 2
3.1. Objectives
The results of experiment 1 showed that when using AR HUD, 
the participants were more likely to notice augmented stimuli. 
However, they were more likely to experience inattentional 
blindness 
to 
unpredictable 
stimuli 
not 
augmented. 
Nevertheless, existing AR HUD designs purposed different stra­
tegies over the choice of which stimulus to augment. Moreover, 
in an intricate driving environment, no AR HUD system can 
ensure that every safety-critical stimulus is augmented reason­
ably and promptly. Therefore, inattentional blindness induced 
by AR HUD failing to augment unpredictable pedestrians 
urgently needs attention and solution. In experiment 2, we 
explored how the workload affects the occurrence of inatten­
tional blindness in driving in AR HUD without the augmented 
unpredictable pedestrian (AR HUD-NP) condition.
3.2. Method
3.2.1. Participants
A total of 20 licensed drivers (mean age = 21.63 years) with 
normal to corrected-to-normal vision were recruited as parti­
cipants for this experiment. Their average driving experience 
is 2.74 years (SD = 1.21) and their average mileage is 283 km. 
All participants provided written informed consent and were 
compensated for their participation.
3.2.2. Experimental equipment
The experiment equipment and environment are identical to 
those in experiment 1.
3.2.3. Materials
In experiment 2, we created five low-workload trials and five 
high-workload trials on STISIM3. A total of 10 videos were 
generated through video recording as a licensed experimenter 
completes all trials in the driving simulators. Trials of differ­
ent workloads were different in terms of the density of road 
elements. For example, in a low-workload trial, there were no 
curves, 1 decelerating lead vehicle, 5 buildings, 20 trees, and 5 
pedestrians, while in a high-workload video there were 4 
curves,1 decelerating lead vehicle, 15 opposite vehicles, 20 
buildings, 35 trees, and 20 pedestrians (see Figure 2 for 
demonstration 
graphs 
for 
two 
workload 
conditions). 
Participants would experience six pedestrians-crossing-road 
events (three in each workload condition). Other settings are 
the same as those in experiment 1.
3.2.4. Experimental variables and design
This experiment used a within-subject design. The workload 
condition was the independent variable with two levels: (1) 
low-workload condition; (2) high-workload condition. All 
participants viewed low-workload and high-workload videos. 
The workload can be manipulated by the complexity of the 
road according to Paxion et al. (2015), such as the number of 
curves, traffic flow, number of pedestrians, and the complex­
ity of the surrounding environment. We used the NASA-TLX 
scale scores to verify whether the road complexity is success­
fully manipulated. The dependent variables were the occur­
rence of inattentional blindness and reaction time without 
blindness, which is the same as that in experiment 1. In 
experiment 2, we did not include LBFTS error as the depen­
dent variable because we did not find any difference in the 
frequency of LBFTS error among three augmented conditions. 
Thus, we believed that the incidence of LBFTS error was not 
a sensitive indicator in our study.
3.2.5. Procedure
The experiment procedure was identical to that in experiment 
1. In experiment 2, all subjects completed both high load 
Figure 2. Demonstration graphs for (a) low- and (b) high-workload conditions.
844 
 Y. WANG ET AL.

--- Page 10 ---
block and low load block., and each block included five trials 
(i.e. five videos). The presentation order of two blocks was 
counterbalanced in an ABBA order. That is, half participants 
followed the “high ! low” order, and the other half followed 
the “low ! high” order. We used the Latin square design to 
counterbalance the sequence of five trials in each block. 
Participants were instructed to press the button when they 
noticed the following: (1) the ego-car exceeded the speed 
limit, (2) the ego-car ran a red light, (3) the distance between 
the ego-car and the lead car was too close, (4) a participant in 
front was crossing the road. However, only the data of parti­
cipants responding to pedestrians were used for analysis.
When participants completed one trial, the next trial auto­
matically started according to the system setting. After com­
pleting one block, the participants were asked to complete the 
NASA-TLX scale to measure their workload of each workload 
block.
3.3. Results
3.3.1. Data processing
The data processing method was the same as that in experi­
ment 1. The occurrence of inattentional blindness is based on 
drivers’ response (response or no response). We coded the 
result as no blindness if participants responded to unpredict­
able pedestrians and inattentional blindness if they responded. 
The reaction time without blindness equals the exact time the 
participants press the brake pedal minus the exact time the 
unpredictable pedestrian showed up. For the NASA-TLX 
score, we asked the participants to finish two parts of the 
questionnaire. We multiplied the weighted score (the score 
derived from the second part of the questionnaire) and the 
scale score (the score derived from the first part of the 
questionnaire). Then, we divided it by 15 to get our final 
workload score.
3.3.2. Subjective workload and road complexity
A total of 117 valid trials were obtained. The generalized 
estimating equation (GEE) was adopted to analyze the occur­
rence of blindness, the subjective workload, and reaction time 
without blindness data. Similar to GLM, GEE can handle 
discrete and non-linear data. GEE is suitable for a within- 
subject design while GLM is suitable for a between-subject 
design.
We used the NASA-TLX as the dependent variable and the 
workload condition as the factor to perform GEE. We used 
the linear model as the link function. The result showed that 
workload condition had a significant impact on subjective 
workload (χ2(1) = 10.556, p< .001) (Table 4), indicating that 
we successfully manipulated participants’ subjective workload 
by altering the complexity of roads (Figure 3c).
3.3.3. Occurrence of inattentional blindness
We used the occurrence of inattentional blindness as the 
dependent variable and the workload condition as the factor 
to perform GEE. We used binary logistic regression as the link 
function. The result showed that the workload condition had 
a significant impact on subjective workload (χ2(1) = 6.050, 
p< .05) (Table 4), and the incidence of inattentional blindness 
was significantly higher in the high-workload condition 
(Figure 3a).
3.3.4. Reaction time without blindness
We used the reaction time without blindness as the dependent 
variable and the workload condition as the factor to perform 
GEE. We used the linear model as the link function. The 
Table 4. Effect of workload on inattention blindness and reaction time.
Dependent Variable
Workload Condition
B
SE
Wald χ2
p
OR
95% CI OR
The occurrence of inattentional blindness
High
0.740
0.301
6.050
.014*
2.097
[1.162, 3.782]
Low
Reaction time without blindness
High
−141.450
66.126
4.576
.032*
3.71E-62
[1.92E-118, 7.17E-06]
Low
NASA-TLX Score
High
−6.267
1.9288
10.556
.001***
0.002
[4.33E-05, 0.083]
Low
*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001. 
Figure 3. (a) Incidence of inattentional blindness, (b) reaction time without blindness (mean and standard error), and (c) NASA-TLX score (mean and standard error) 
under different workload conditions.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 
 845 

--- Page 11 ---
result showed that the workload has a significant impact on 
the reaction time (χ2(1) = 4.576, p< .05) (Table 4), and the 
driver’s reaction time was longer in the high-workload con­
dition than in the low-workload condition (Figure 3b).
4. General discussion
The empirical study focused on the inattentional blindness in 
AR HUD-assisted driving. This study compared the occur­
rence of inattentional blindness in different AR HUD- 
augmented conditions and further explored the impact of 
workload on inattentional blindness. The results showed that 
utilizing AR HUD could significantly reduce driver’s inatten­
tional blindness if the unpredictable stimuli were augmented 
with a bounding box. However, AR HUD could also encou­
rage inattentional blindness if the system failed to augment 
the unpredictable stimuli, and high-workload participants 
would experience more inattentional blindness.
4.1. Impact of AR HUD-augmented condition on 
inattentional blindness
The present study provided empirical evidence that AR HUD in 
driving could induce inattentional blindness toward a subject 
not augmented, which consists of the conclusion drawn by 
previous studies (Gabbard et al., 2014; H. Kim & Gabbard, 
2019; Oh et al., 2016; Romer et al., 2014). The present study 
further studied inattentional blindness toward unpredictable 
pedestrians. This study found that drivers using AR HUD were 
more likely to pay attention to augmented objects, thereby 
neglecting the safety-critical objects not detected and augmented 
by the system. That is to say, if the system fails to augment an 
abruptly appeared pedestrian and instead augment a traffic sign 
with a bounding box, then the driver may experience inattention 
blindness toward pedestrians because the drivers’ attention is 
shifted to the augmented traffic sign. This event could lead to 
serious traffic accidents. The underlying reason may be that the 
AR bounding box used to augment environmental elements in 
AR HUD guided the participant’s attention to a certain subject, 
causing them to ignore other stimuli.
We can also explain the result in terms of the theory of 
attention set. Pammer et al. (2015) first proposed the concept 
of “attention set” in their study of inattentional blindness in 
driving. Attention set refers to an individual’s mental template 
of objects, situations, or behavior based on its consistent seman­
tic features and feature relationships. Koivisto and Revonsuo 
(2008) proved that if individuals were faced with multiple stimuli 
simultaneously, then they would only pay attention to the target 
stimulus while ignoring others. In other words, individuals built 
an “attention set” of the features of this specific stimulus. 
According to the theory of “attention set,” the observer estab­
lishes an attention set that contains features of the target object 
to better monitor the environment, enabling the easy detection 
of stimuli containing the same features. Hence, the more the 
stimuli overlap with the attention set, the easier it will be noticed 
by observers. With regard to the driving task, the attention set 
should have only contained features of objects and processes 
related to the driving environment. However, if participants use 
AR HUD, then the “AR bounding box” becomes a new feature of 
the participants’ attention set. Therefore, the overlap ratio of the 
augmented unpredictable stimuli and the attention set would 
increase compared with when not using AR HUD. Meanwhile, 
the overlap ratio between the unpredictable stimuli not augmen­
ted, and the attention set would decrease. This event explains 
why participants using AR HUD were more likely to detect the 
augmented stimuli and showed more inattentional blindness to 
the unpredictable stimuli not augmented.
The limitation of the human visual system could also be 
the underlying reason for AR HUD-induced inattentional 
blindness. According to Treisman’s (1982) theory of percep­
tual grouping, our visual attention is a limited pool of 
resource which curtails parallel information processing. That 
is, one cannot focus on two different perceptual groups at 
once. The theory echoes Wicken’s viewpoint that the visual 
system is limited in monitoring multiple displays for it only 
has a single focal point (Baldwin et al., 2012; Wickens, 1984, 
2002) . In a HUD display study, McCann et al. (1993) demon­
strated that our visual system parses HUD display as separate 
perceptual groups. Thus, when drivers focused their attention 
on HUD display (i.e. the bounding box in the present study), 
real-world road elements (i.e. The pedestrians) were excluded 
from processing and vice versa. As a result, drivers need to 
shift attention constantly between the HUD and the real 
world, which causes inattentional blindness. Although 
McCann’s et al. (1993) conclusion was based on the screen- 
fixed AR HUD design, we presume that world-fixed AR HUD 
may contain a similar flaw that induces inattentional blind­
ness. Future study is needed to test this hypothesis.
Inattentional blindness could also be the result of lacking 
cognitive resources. Cognitive load theory suggests that our 
cognitive resources are limited. If the ongoing task demands 
considerable cognitive resources, then the cognitive resources 
left are insufficient to process other tasks (Lavie, 1995, 2005). 
In experiment 1, we found that AR HUD display cannot 
effectively reduce participants’ subjective workload. This 
notion could explain why drivers under No AR HUD and AR 
HUD-NP conditions shared a similar proportion of inatten­
tional blindness toward unpredictable pedestrians. In experi­
ment 2, we found that high-workload drivers were more likely 
to experience inattentional blindness, and they reacted signifi­
cantly slower to unpredictable pedestrians compared with low- 
workload drivers. That is, if the driving task is demanding, then 
driving would take up much of the driver’s cognitive resource, 
leaving the driver with insufficient cognitive resources to han­
dle unpredictable contingencies.
4.2. Impact of workload on inattentional blindness when 
using AR HUD
Experiment 2 was based on a previous paradigm and explored 
the impact of workload on inattentional blindness in AR 
HUD-assisted car driving (Murphy & Greene, 2015, 2016). 
The result confirmed that the high-complexity road environ­
ment induced a higher workload, indicating that our manip­
ulation of workload was effective (Paxion et al., 2015). We 
also concluded that a higher workload would lead to more 
inattentional blindness or prolonged reaction to unpredictable 
stimuli, which was in accordance with the findings of previous 
846 
 Y. WANG ET AL.

--- Page 12 ---
studies (Hyman et al., 2010; Murphy & Greene, 2015, 2016). 
Many cognitive studies of inattentional blindness also come 
up with the same conclusion and can help to explain this 
phenomenon (Cartwright-Finch & Lavie, 2007). For example, 
Macdonald and Lavie (2008) adopted the classic letter-search 
paradigm to study inattentional blindness. They proposed that 
load-induced blindness was caused only by the allocation of 
limited capacity attention, and not by other cognitive pro­
cesses. Their inference was consistent with cognitive load 
theory, which believes that our cognitive resources are limited, 
and when exhausted, we can no longer process other stimuli. 
That is, we need sufficient cognitive resources to notice and 
respond to target stimuli in time (Lavie, 2005; Lavie et al., 
2014). Therefore, we deemed that drivers failed to detect 
unpredictable stimuli or to respond to them quickly under 
high workloads in our experiment. The reason is that the 
high-complexity 
road 
demands 
considerable 
cognitive 
resources from drivers, leaving them with insufficient 
resources to deal with new stimuli.
Experiment 2 provides additional insight on the impact of 
workload on inattentional blindness in AR HUD-assisted 
driving. As the incidence of inattentional blindness increase 
and the response time to unpredictable stimuli also increases, 
indicating that cognitive resource was closely associated with 
inattentional blindness. Thus, future studies should examine 
their underlying relationship in driving.
4.3. Implications for AR HUD design
World-fixed AR HUD was proved to be more effective than 
screen-fixed AR HUD as the former is conformal to the real 
world and will not cluster real-world view. However, the present 
study revealed that the world-fixed AR HUD could also com­
promise attention allocation of drivers, that is, the bounding box 
used to augment important road objects may serve as an atten­
tion pointer that attracts too much attention from drivers to 
augmented objects leaving critical road events undetected. In 
other words, drivers will be more likely to experience inatten­
tional blindness to critical road events under AR HUD assis­
tance. This case counters the original purpose of developing the 
AR HUD system to reduce road accidents. Moreover, once the 
drivers realize that the system is overwhelmingly attention- 
demanding, they may stop using it at all.
Geometric elements such as quadrate- and triangular- 
shaped bounding graphics are widely accepted in the AR 
HUD warning system design (Gabbard et al., 2014). 
However, few studies have pointed out its limitation. The 
inattentional blindness phenomenon observed in the present 
study provides a new insight into world-fixed AR HUD 
design. Cues similar to bounding boxes are too prominent 
for drivers when they are superimposed on real-world objects. 
Thus, softer and less distracting cues should be introduced in 
the AR HUD design to attract an appropriate amount of 
attention from drivers without negatively affecting their abil­
ity to observe the surrounding environment. For example, 
Kim and Gabbard (2019) have developed “virtual shadow” 
AR HUD cues that can guide the drivers’ attention without 
narrowing it. Park and Kim (2013) used a green arrow at the 
pedestrian’s head position as cues to guide drivers’ attention 
properly. In general, we recommend AR HUD cues that only 
give hints of the existence of augmented (e.g., an arrow) 
objects instead of extracting them from the real-world envir­
onment as the bounding boxes do.
We also recommended using different cues to augment 
different types of road elements. In our experiments, we 
used the same bounding boxes to augment pedestrians, traffic 
lights, and road signs. These road elements often appeared at 
the same time in the driver’s sight. According to “attentional 
set” theory, the bounding boxes become the new features of 
augmented objects in the AR HUD augmented condition, 
which requires more attention resources for drivers to identify 
the type of augmented objects and judge their safety signifi­
cance respectively. If different cues were applied in the AR 
HUD design, the driver’s mental workload may drop and may 
develop a safer attention allocation strategy. Previous studies 
have strived to design diverse AR HUD cues. Park and Kim 
(2013) proposed an AR HUD interface design with various 
cues to augment different road elements. Gabbard et al. 
(2014) summed up different AR HUD cues used in 
a previous study. S. Kim and Dey (2016) included visual 
icons in their AR HUD designed to better present road 
information. We also believe that affective AR HUD design 
may attract drivers attention naturally and could provide 
benefit to road safety (Ho & Spence, 2013). Future studies 
can give some insight into it.
4.4. Limitations and research prospect
The present study has certain limitations. First, the present study 
chose driving videos as the experimental material in considera­
tion of the paradigm of previous studies, the difficulty of data 
collection, and the issue of technical limitation (H. Kim & 
Gabbard, 2019; Lu et al., 2020; Schwarz & Fastenmeier, 2017). 
Watching video clips and pretending to drive cannot precisely 
imitate the workload nor the close loop control in real-world 
diving, leaving the study with low ecological validity. Future 
studies can repeat the present study in a natural or simulated 
driving condition to explore the influence of AR HUD on 
inattentional blindness and driving performance. Second, the 
present study used a portable eye tracker to collect eye move­
ment data, so the participants were carefully instructed to restrict 
their head movement for data collection. However, keeping their 
head still in a long driving task is impossible, and this case may 
eliminate the precision of eye movement data. Moreover, 
restricting head movement would also hurt the ecological valid­
ity of the study. Future studies should introduce more precise 
apparatus to avoid these problems.
To optimize the existing AR HUD design, additional fac­
tors affecting inattentional blindness in AR HUD need to be 
investigated. Previous studies have suggested that the shape 
and color of unpredictable stimuli affect the occurrence of 
inattentional blindness (Hyman et al., 2010; Simons & 
Chabris, 1999). With regard to the design of the AR HUD 
interface, the effect of some properties of AR warning graphic, 
such as the shape and color and appropriate timing on inatten­
tional blindness in driving is still an open question (H. Kim & 
Gabbard, 2019). Moreover, the present study only focused on 
whether unpredictable stimuli were augmented in AR HUD. 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 
 847 

--- Page 13 ---
Other design factors such as the instrument panel, real-time 
navigation information, and warning information, may also 
affect inattentional blindness in driving. Furthermore, subject 
variables such as driver’s age, experience, and road familiarity 
may interact with the AR HUD interface and driving environ­
ment, causing inconsistent results. Therefore, future studies 
could focus on these factors to offer new insight into inatten­
tional blindness in driving. With the development of AR tech­
nology, the multimodal AR technology that integrates multiple 
sensory channels has been applied to the driving field 
(Kaczmarek, 1995; Kern et al., 2009; Hwang & Ryu, 2010; 
Carton & Dunne, 2013; S. Kim & Dey, 2016). A study has proved 
that the multi-model AR technology can bring better driving 
performance. However, such technology may also overload dri­
vers with its rich information, causing more inattentional blind­
ness. Thus, the application of multi-model AR technology in 
driving and its impact on inattentional blindness still needs 
further exploration.
5. Conclusion
The present study focused on the inattentional blindness in AR- 
assisted driving and the impact of workload when the AR system 
fails to augment the unpredictable stimuli. The study found that 
AR HUD can reduce inattentional blindness toward augmented 
subjects (subjects inside the AR bounding box) while inducing 
inattentional blindness toward subjects outside the AR bounding 
box. Moreover, a higher workload will intensify inattentional 
blindness toward subjects outside the AR bounding box.
Disclosure of potential conflict of interest
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of 
China under Grant [31900768]; Youth Innovation Special Project of 
Basic Scientific Research Foundation of Zhejiang Sci-Tech University 
under Grant [2020Q046]; Science and technology innovation activity 
plan of college students in Zhejiang Xinmiao Talents Program under 
Grant [2019R46035]; National College Student Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship Training Program of Zhejiang Sci-Tech University 
under Grant [201910338003].
References
Baldwin, C. L., Spence, C., Bliss, J. P., Brill, J. C., Wogalter, M. S., 
Mayhorn, C. B., & Ferris, T. K. (2012). Multimodal cueing: The 
relative benefits of the auditory, visual, and tactile channels in com­
plex environments. Proceedings of the human factors and ergonomics 
society annual meeting (pp. 1431–1435). USA: SAGE Publications. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1071181312561404
Beanland, V., & Pammer, K. (2010a). Looking without seeing or seeing 
without looking? Eye movements in sustained inattentional blindness. 
Vision Research, 50(10), 977–988. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.visres.2010. 
02.024
Beanland, V., & Pammer, K. (2010b). Gorilla watching: Effects of expo­
sure and expectations on inattentional blindness. ASCS09: Proceedings 
of the 9th conference of the Australasian society for cognitive science 
(pp. 12–20). Macquarie University.
Carton, A., & Dunne, L. E. (2013). Tactile distance feedback for fire­
fighters: Design and preliminary evaluation of a sensory augmentation 
glove. Proceedings of the 4th augmented human international confer­
ence (pp. 58–64). Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi. 
org/10.1145/2459236.2459247
Cartwright-Finch, U., & Lavie, N. (2007). The role of perceptual load in 
inattentional blindness. Cognition, 102(3), 321–340. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.cognition.2006.01.002
Charlton, S. G., & Starkey, N. J. (2013). Driving on familiar roads: 
Automaticity and inattention blindness. Transportation Research 
Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 19, 121–133. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.trf.2013.03.008
Davies, A. M. A., Waterman, S., White, R. C., & Davies, M. (2013). When 
you fail to see what you were told to look for: Inattentional blindness 
and task instructions. Consciousness and Cognition, 22(1), 221–230. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2012.11.015
De Fockert, J. W., & Bremner, A. J. (2011). Release of inattentional 
blindness by high working memory load: Elucidating the relationship 
between working memory and selective attention. Cognition, 121(3), 
400–408. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2011.08.016
Department for Transport. (2019). Reported road casualties great Britain 
annual report 2019. https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data- 
sets/ras50-contributory-factors#history
Dixon, B. J., Daly, M. J., Chan, H., Vescan, A. D., Witterick, I. J., & 
Irish, J. C. (2013). Surgeons blinded by enhanced navigation: The 
effect of augmented reality on attention. Surgical Endoscopy, 27(2), 
454–461. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00464-012-2457-3
Dixon, B. J., Daly, M. J., Chan, H. H. L., Vescan, A., Witterick, I. J., & 
Irish, J. C. (2014). Inattentional blindness increased with augmented 
reality surgical navigation. American Journal of Rhinology & Allergy, 
28(5), 433–437. https://doi.org/10.2500/ajra.2014.28.4067
Gabbard, J. L., Fitch, G. M., & Kim, H. (2014). Behind the glass: Driver 
challenges and opportunities for AR automotive applications. 
Proceedings of the IEEE, 102(2), 124–136. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
JPROC.2013.2294642
Governors Highway Safety Association. (2019). Pedestrian traffic fatal­
ities by state. https://www.ghsa.org/sites/default/files/2020-02/GHSA- 
Pedestrian-Spotlight-FINAL-rev2.pdf
Hart, S. G., & Staveland, L. E. (1988). Development of NASA-TLX (Task 
Load Index): Results of empirical and theoretical research. In P. A. 
Hancock & N. Meshkati (Eds.), Advances in psychology (Vol. 52, pp. 
139–183). North-Holland: Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0166- 
4115(08)62386-9
Ho, C., & Spence, C. (2013). Affective multisensory driver interface 
design. International Journal of Vehicle Noise and Vibration, 9(1–2), 
61–74. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJVNV.2013.053817
Hwang, S., & Ryu, J. (2010). The haptic steering wheel: Vibro-tactile 
based navigation for the driving environment. 2010 8th IEEE interna­
tional conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications 
Workshops (PERCOM workshops) (pp. 660–665). IEEE. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/PERCOMW.2010.5470517
Hwang, Y., Park, B.-J., & Kim, K.-H. (2016). Effects of augmented-reality 
head-up display system use on risk perception and psychological 
changes of drivers. ETRI Journal, 38(4), 757–766. https://doi.org/10. 
4218/etrij.16.0115.0770
Hyman, I. E., Boss, S. M., Wise, B. M., McKenzie, K. E., & Caggiano, J. M. 
(2010). Did you see the unicycling clown? Inattentional blindness while 
walking and talking on a cell phone. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 24(5), 
597–607. https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.1638
Kaczmarek, K. A. (1995). Sensory augmentation and substitution. In J. D. 
Bronzino (Ed.), CRC handbook of biomedical engineering (pp. 
2100–2109). CRC Press.
Karar, V., Agrawal, D., & Ghosh, S. (2015). Intuitive approach towards 
detection of attention tunneling while using a head-up display. 
Chinese Optics Letters, 13(8), 081201. https://doi.org/10.3788/ 
COL201513.081201
Karar, V., & Ghosh, S. (2012). Effect of varying contrast ratio and 
brightness non- uniformity over human attention and tunneling 
aspects in aviation. International Journal of Electronics and 
Communication Engineering & Technology, 3(2), 400–412. https:// 
848 
 Y. WANG ET AL.

--- Page 14 ---
www.semanticscholar.org/paper/EFFECT-OF-VARYING- 
CONTRAST-RATIO-AND-BRIGHTNESS-NON-Karar/ 
3b94ebcd8e4be5573ab4bbe1a7f1b168c1764a8e
Kennedy, K. D., & Bliss, J. P. (2013). Inattentional blindness in 
a simulated driving task. Proceedings of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 57(1), 1899–1903. https://doi. 
org/10.1177/1541931213571423
Kern, D., Marshall, P., Hornecker, E., Rogers, Y., & Schmidt, A. (2009). Enhancing 
navigation information with tactile output embedded into the steering wheel. 
International conference on pervasive computing (pp. 42–58). Springer.
Kim, H., & Gabbard, J. L. (2019). Assessing distraction potential of 
augmented reality head-up displays for vehicle drivers. Human 
Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 
001872081984484. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720819844845
Kim, H., Miranda Anon, A., Misu, T., Li, N., Tawari, A., & Fujimura, K. 
(2016). Look at me: Augmented reality pedestrian warning system 
using an in-vehicle volumetric head up display. Proceedings of the 21st 
international conference on Intelligent User Interfaces - IUI ’16 (pp. 
294–298). ACM Press. https://doi.org/10.1145/2856767.2856815
Kim, S., & Dey, A. K. (2016). Augmenting human senses to improve the user 
experience in cars: Applying augmented reality and haptics approaches to 
reduce cognitive distances. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 75(16), 
9587–9607. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-015-2712-4
Koivisto, M., & Revonsuo, A. (2008). The role of unattended distractors 
in sustained inattentional blindness. Psychological Research, 72(1), 
39–48. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00426-006-0072-4
Langlois, S., & Soualmi, B. (2016). Augmented reality versus classical HUD to 
take over from automated driving: An aid to smooth reactions and to 
anticipate maneuvers. 2016 IEEE 19th international conference on 
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC) (pp. 1571–1578). IEEE. https:// 
doi.org/10.1109/ITSC.2016.7795767
Lavie, N. (1995). Perceptual load as a necessary condition for selective 
attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and 
Performance, 21(3), 451. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2004.12.004
Lavie, N. (2005). Distracted and confused?: Selective attention under 
load. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(2), 75–82. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.tics.2004.12.004
Lavie, N., Beck, D. M., & Konstantinou, N. (2014). Blinded by the load: 
Attention, awareness and the role of perceptual load. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 369(1641), 
20130205. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0205
Lu, Z., Happee, R., & De Winter, J. C. F. (2020). Take over! A video-clip 
study measuring attention, situation awareness, and decision-making 
in the face of an impending hazard. Transportation Research Part F: 
Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, 72, 211–225. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.trf.2020.05.013
Macdonald, J. S., & Lavie, N. (2008). Load induced blindness. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 34(5), 
1078. https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.34.5.1078
Mack, A., & Rock, I. (1998). Inattentional blindness. MIT Press.
McCann, R. S., Foyle, D. C., & Johnston, J. C. (1993). Attentional 
limitations with head-up displays. In JensenR. S. (Ed.), Proceedings 
of the Seventh International Symposium on Aviation Psychology (pp. 
70–75). Columbus: Ohio State University.
Moodi, M. (1995). Head-up display supplemental information package 
(Boeing document no. D6–81703). Boeing.
Most, S. B., & Astur, R. S. (2007). Feature-based attentional set as a cause 
of traffic accidents. Visual Cognition, 15(2), 125–132. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/13506280600959316
Most, S. B., Scholl, B. J., Clifford, E. R., & Simons, D. J. (2005). What you 
see is what you set: Sustained inattentional blindness and the capture 
of awareness. Psychological Review, 112(1), 217. https://doi.org/10. 
1037/0033-295X.112.1.217
Most, S. B., Simons, D. J., Scholl, B. J., Jimenez, R., Clifford, E., & 
Chabris, C. F. (2001). How not to be seen: The contribution of similarity 
and selective ignoring to sustained inattentional blindness. Psychological 
Science, 12(1), 9–17. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9280.00303
Moussa, G., Radwan, E., & Hussain, K. (2012). Augmented reality 
vehicle system: Left-turn maneuver study. Transportation Research 
Part C: Emerging Technologies, 21(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
trc.2011.08.005
Murphy, G., & Greene, C. M. (2015). High perceptual load causes 
inattentional blindness and deafness in drivers. Visual Cognition, 23 
(7), 810–814. https://doi.org/10.1080/13506285.2015.1093245
Murphy, G., & Greene, C. M. (2016). Perceptual load induces inatten­
tional blindness in drivers. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 30(3), 
479–483. https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.3216
Neisser, U. (1979). The control of information pickup in selective looking 
in perception and its development: A tribute to Eleanor J Gibson 
Ed. AD Pick. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Neisser, U., & Becklen, R. (1975). Selective looking: Attending to visually 
specified events. Cognitive Psychology, 7(4), 480–494. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/0010-0285(75)90019-5
Ng-Thow-Hing, V., Bark, K., Beckwith, L., Tran, C., Bhandari, R., & 
Sridhar, S. (2013). User-centered perspectives for automotive augmen­
ted reality. IEEE international symposium on mixed and augmented 
reality (pp. 13–22). IEEE.
Oh, H. J., Ko, S. M., & Ji, Y. G. (2016). Effects of superimposition of a 
head-up display on driving performance and glance behavior in the 
elderly. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 32(2), 
143–154. https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2015.1104155
Pammer, K., Bairnsfather, J., Burns, J., & Hellsing, A. (2015). Not all 
hazards are created equal: The significance of hazards in inattentional 
blindness for static driving scenes. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 29(5), 
782–788. https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.3153
Pammer, K., & Blink, C. (2013). Attentional differences in driving judg­
ments for country and city scenes: Semantic congruency in inatten­
tional blindness. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 50, 955–963. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2012.07.026
Park, H., & Kim, K. (2013). Efficient information representation method 
for driver-centered AR-HUD system. International conference of 
design, user experience, and usability (pp. 393–400). Springer. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-39238-2_43
Park, H. S., Park, M. W., Won, K. H., Kim, K.-H., & Jung, S. K. (2013). In- 
vehicle AR-HUD system to provide driving-safety information. ETRI 
Journal, 35(6), 1038–1047. https://doi.org/10.4218/etrij.13.2013.0041
Paxion, J., Galy, E., & Berthelon, C. (2015). Overload depending on 
driving experience and situation complexity: Which strategies faced 
with a pedestrian crossing? Applied Ergonomics, 51, 343–349. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2015.06.014
Remington, A., Cartwright-Finch, U., & Lavie, N. (2014). I can see clearly 
now: The effects of age and perceptual load on inattentional blindness. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 229. https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fnhum.2014.00229
Romer, D., Lee, Y.-C., McDonald, C. C., & Winston, F. K. (2014). Adolescence, 
attention allocation, and driving safety. Journal of Adolescent Health, 54(5), 
S6–S15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2013.10.202
Schwarz, F., & Fastenmeier, W. (2017). Augmented reality warnings in vehi­
cles: Effects of modality and specificity on effectiveness. Accident Analysis 
& Prevention, 101, 55–66. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2017.01.019
Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). Gorillas in our midst: Sustained 
inattentional blindness for dynamic events. Perception, 28(9), 
1059–1074. https://doi.org/10.1068/p281059
Strayer, D. L., Drews, F. A., & Johnston, W. A. (2003). Cell 
phone-induced failures of visual attention during simulated driving. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 9(1), 23. https://doi.org/ 
10.1037/1076-898X.9.1.23
Treisman, A. (1982). Perceptual grouping and attention in visual search 
for features and for objects. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Human Perception and Performance, 8(2), 194–214. https://doi.org/ 
10.1037/0096-1523.8.2.194
White, C., & Caird, J. (2010). The blind date: The effects of change 
blindness, passenger conversation and gender on looked-but-failed- 
to-see (LBFTS) errors. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 42(6), 
1822–1830. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2010.05.003
Wickens, C. D. (1984). Processing resources in attention. In 
ParasuramanR. & DaviesR. (Eds.), Varieties of attention (pp. 63– 
101). New York: Academic Press.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF HUMAN–COMPUTER INTERACTION 
 849 

--- Page 15 ---
Wickens, C. D. (2002). Multiple resources and performance prediction. 
Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science, 3(2), 159–177. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/14639220210123806
Yanko, M. R., & Spalek, T. M. (2013). Route familiarity breeds inatten­
tion: A driving simulator study. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 57, 
80–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2013.04.003
About the Authors
Yuwei Wang is a graduate student at the Department of Psychology, 
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University. Her research interests include traffic 
safety, user experience design, human–computer interaction.
Yimin Wu is an undergraduate student at the Department of Psychology, 
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University. His research interests include user experi­
ence and human–computer interaction.
Cheng Chen is a graduate student at the Department of Psychology, 
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University. Her research interests include augmented 
reality and human–computer interaction.
Bohan Wu is a graduate student at the Department of Psychology, 
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University. His research interests include user experi­
ence design and ergonomics.
Shu Ma is a PhD researcher at the Department of Psychology, Zhejiang 
Sci-Tech University. Her research interests include human–computer 
interaction, traffic safety and automated driving.
Duming Wang is an assistant professor at the Department of 
Psychology, Zhejiang Sci -Tech University. His research interests include 
human–computer interaction, human factors, and user experience.
Hongting Li is a professor at the Department of Psychology, Zhejiang 
Sci-Tech University. His research interests include human–computer 
interaction, ergonomics, user experience, augmented reality and virtual 
reality.
ZhenYang is an assistant professor at the Department of Psychology, 
Zhejiang Sci-Tech University. His research interests include human 
computer interaction, human factors, user experience, cognitive science 
and neuroergonomics.
850 
 Y. WANG ET AL.
