--- Page 1 ---
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Accident Analysis and Prevention
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/aap
How to warn drivers in various safety-critical situations – Diﬀerent
strategies, diﬀerent reactions
Susann Winkler⁎, Juela Kazazi, Mark Vollrath
Technische Universität Braunschweig, Department of Engineering and Traﬃc Psychology, Gaußstraße 23, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
In-vehicle collision avoidance assistance
Warning strategy/speciﬁcity
Head-up display (HUD) visualization
Hazardous urban incidents
Driving simulator experiment
Driver behavior/subjective acceptance
evaluation
A B S T R A C T
Technological advances allow supporting drivers in a multitude of occasions, ranging from comfort enhancement
to collision avoidance, for example through driver warnings, which are especially crucial for traﬃc safety. This
psychological driving simulator experiment investigated how to warn drivers visually in order to prevent ac-
cidents in various safety-critical situations. Collision frequencies, driving behavior and subjective evaluations of
situation criticality, warning understandability and helpfulness of sixty drivers were measured in two trials of
eight scenarios each (within-subjects factors). The warning type in the head-up display (HUD) varied (between-
subjects) in its strategy (attention-/reaction-oriented) and speciﬁcity (generic/speciﬁc) over four warning groups
and a control group without a warning. The results show that the scenarios diﬀered in their situation criticality
and drivers adapted their reactions accordingly, which underlines the importance of testing driver assistance
systems in diverse scenarios. Besides some learning eﬀects over the trials, all warned drivers showed faster and
stronger brake reactions. Some warning concepts were understood better than others, but all were accepted.
Generic warnings were eﬀective, yet the warning strategy should adapt to situation requirements and/or driver
behavior. A stop symbol as reaction generic warning is recommendable for diverse kinds of use cases, leading to
fast and strong reactions. However, for rather moderate driver reactions an attention generic approach with a
caution symbol might be more suitable. Further research should investigate multi-stage warnings with adaptive
strategies for application to various situations including other modalities and false alarms.
1. Introduction
Advanced driver assistance systems (ADAS) such as warnings and
interventions, lateral and longitudinal control or action recommenda-
tions can contribute to traﬃc safety and driving comfort, as many
studies have shown (e.g., Bengler et al., 2018; Cicchino, 2017;
Hanowski et al., 1999; Hofauer et al., 2018; Jones and Hansman, 2007;
Lee et al., 2002b; Rittger and Götze, 2018; van Driel et al., 2007). Yet,
many ADAS are tested in very speciﬁc use cases. This makes them
perfect in these situations, but their adaptation to other use cases is
limited. Especially in urban areas the variety of situations drivers are
confronted with increases exponentially. Therefore the human-machine
interface (HMI) of ADAS should be designed in a way that allows dri-
vers to understand and handle all kinds of situations successfully
without further strain due to understanding, prioritizing or diﬀer-
entiating a number of ADAS at the same time. Thus, integrating all
ADAS into one HMI solution which adapts its output according to si-
tuation and driver needs seems ideal. Such an “HMI tool kit” (Drüke
et al., 2018) or so called “information/warning/intervention strategies”
(Hesse et al., 2011) were for instance focused in research projects like
“UR:BAN” (Bengler et al., 2018) or “interactIVe” (Alessandretti
et al.,2014).
As part of an integrative HMI, collision warnings would be of
highest priority, overlaying all other ADAS, in case of a safety-critical
situation (hazard on collision course with the drivers’ vehicle). They
support drivers’ reactions by alerting them to impending hazards in
order to reduce crash rates and severities. By implementing a con-
tinuum of diﬀerent urgency levels for accident prevention or mitigation
(multi-stage warning approach), drivers are always provided with ex-
actly the support they need in the respective safety-critical situations
(see Campbell et al., 2007; Diederichs et al., 2010; Jones and Hansman,
2007; Naujoks and Neukum, 2014; Werneke et al., 2014; Winkler et al.,
2016, 2018a, 2018b; Zarife, 2014). Initially, they might receive an
unintrusive information or early warning about an upcoming situation.
With increasing criticality of a situation this might escalate to more
urgent warnings that ask for stronger driver reactions in later stages.
Finally, the vehicle might even intervene automatically. Designing col-
lision warnings is therefore a complex and challenging task of high
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2018.01.040
Received 22 September 2017; Received in revised form 13 January 2018; Accepted 30 January 2018
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: susann.winkler@tu-braunschweig.de (S. Winkler).
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
0001-4575/ © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Please cite this article as: Winkler, S., Accident Analysis and Prevention (2018), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2018.01.040

--- Page 2 ---
signiﬁcance.
Besides technical and environmental factors, like limited time
frames and hazard recognition (its type, relevance, anticipated move-
ment and accuracy), user-centered questions such as how to present the
crucial information to drivers for maximum beneﬁt also merit con-
sideration. Environments like urban areas with a maximum of traﬃc
variance are particularly demanding for drivers and car manufacturers
(for more information on the interaction of complex traﬃc situations
and driver assistance in urban areas see the underlying research project
“UR:BAN”; Bengler et al., 2018). Urban areas bear a lot of distracting
stimuli for drivers, while high traﬃc and information densities restrict
decision periods to a minimum. All kinds of road users (e.g., pedes-
trians, motorists and cyclists) interact at various locations (e.g., at in-
tersections, straight roads or curves) with diﬀerent speeds, creating a
multitude of potentially safety-critical situations. Hence, the frequent
occurrence of hazardous situations makes accidents very likely, espe-
cially due to driver errors like attention misallocation, wrong ex-
pectations or distraction, tailgating, speeding or rule violations and loss
of
vehicle control
(Bhatia, 2003; Great
Britain Department for
Transport, 2015; National Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration,
2008; Singh, 2015; Summala, 1996).
As accident analyses of German road traﬃc show (Statistisches
Bundesamt, 2014), about three quarters of all police-recorded accidents
since 1991 are allotted to urban areas. They also account for the main
part of accidents with personal injuries (ca. 69% in 2011, 2012 and
2013). With increasing urbanization, urban areas and their complex
situations come more and more to the fore of current research activities,
even more so as already existing ADAS are mainly designed for situa-
tions with higher speed limits like rural roads or highways. Thus, it is
important to analyze the interaction between safety-critical urban si-
tuations and ADAS like forward collision warnings (FCW).
However, each situation has its own requirements on how and in
which time frame it should be handled by the drivers without resulting
in a collision. So, the question arises which driver reaction is best in a
variety of situations. Most drivers show brake reactions in safety-critical
situations, rather than for example steering reactions (evasive man-
euvers) or a combination of both maneuvers (Powelleit and Vollrath,
2018), although steering might be better when braking distances are
insuﬃcient (Moeller and Frings, 2014; Schneider et al., 2015). More-
over, not all situations are of the same criticality (for further informa-
tion on hazard perception and characterization see Borowsky and Oron-
Gilad, 2013 or Crundall et al., 2012). There are cases when reactions
from mere attention reallocation (to be ready to react) to speed re-
duction, gas release or even moderate braking might suﬃce to resolve
safety-critical situations such as in early warning stages (e.g., in case of
slow-moving traﬃc in some distance, see Winkler et al., 2016). Hence,
these warnings could also focus on raising or guiding drivers’ attention
(gradual behavior adjustment) when there is more time before hazards
are encountered or situations become even critical (e.g., due to early
object recognition based on car2x communication technology, see
Naujoks and Totzke, 2014; Tan and Huang, 2006). Such early warnings
though could raise the drivers’ attention generally or provide more
details about the hazard (e.g., its type, location or distance) in order to
direct the drivers’ attention distinctly. However, the best strategy is yet
unclear.
Additionally, driver warnings could specify in safety-critical situa-
tions whereupon drivers should concentrate their attention in earlier
warning stages (attention speciﬁc) or how to react in more urgent
warning stages (reaction speciﬁc; see Cao et al., 2010; Lee et al., 1999).
Would this information be helpful for drivers or too much under time
pressure? That is to say, diﬀerentiating the alerts and selecting a
steering reaction instead of a highly automated brake reaction, as for
example recommended by reaction speciﬁc warnings, might add to
drivers’ already high mental workload. Should generic driver warnings
(reaction/attention generic) thus be favored? On the one hand, generic
warnings facilitate time-saving automatic driver responses (like alerted
visual scanning or emergency braking) since they convey less in-
formation. On the other hand, universal warning cues or master alerts
for diﬀerent kinds of situations might lack important details for the
understanding of the situation, which could lead to confusion and
slower reactions (Campbell et al., 2004). Thus, the question of the
warning speciﬁcity arises. Furthermore, warning strategy and speciﬁ-
city might interact, aﬀecting the drivers’ acceptance as well as their
performance (processing and reaction execution; Zarife, 2014). There-
fore, the overall aim of this paper is to examine which types of driver
warnings (varied in strategy and speciﬁcity) suit various safety-critical
situations optimally.
A driving simulator study of Naujoks and Neukum (2014) in-
vestigated the speciﬁcity of driver warnings twofold (conﬂict-speciﬁcity:
indicating hazard type or not; direction-speciﬁcity: indicating hazard
direction or not) besides their timing. According to them, the speciﬁcity
rather inﬂuenced the warning usefulness than the driving behavior.
However, they concentrated more on attention-oriented driver warn-
ings at an earlier, advisory level. Whereas the present study excluded
the timing question by adapting the warning onset to the diﬀerent
safety-critical situations, but extended the speciﬁcity question to reac-
tion-oriented warnings at later, more urgent stages.
Similarly, the video-based experiment of Thoma et al. (2009)
identiﬁed no diﬀerences due to the warning speciﬁcity in the drivers’
reaction time to safety-critical situations. Contrary to the present ex-
periment, their participants did not actually drive themselves, but
merely watched videos in the driving simulator. This enabled the dri-
vers to pay much more attention on every detail of the scene than when
actually driving and thus might have facilitated the hazard detection.
However, in both mentioned studies and another study of similar re-
sults by Brown et al. (2017) the warning visualization was accompanied
by an acoustic warning signal. Despite it being unobtrusive, according
to Naujoks and Neukum (2014), it might still have masked some eﬀects
of the speciﬁcity of the warning visualizations. Therefore, the warning
concepts developed in this study used the visual modality exclusively,
without additional acoustic or haptic warning modalities.
On the one hand, the visual modality can transfer very complex and
detailed information (like diﬀerent levels of speciﬁcity). On the other
hand, drivers are already visually strained by the driving task itself
(Scott and Gray, 2008; Powelleit and Vollrath, 2013; Rockwell, 1972;
van der Horst, 2004). Even more load on the visual channel might be
critical (especially when higher encoding eﬀort is necessary). Drivers’
glances might linger for too long on the warning display so that actually
critical objects or situations might go unnoticed until it is too late.
Besides, drivers might be distracted by secondary tasks, their gaze di-
rected away from the road or their eyes even closed (as during saccades
or when sleepy). In these cases a visual warning might not reach dri-
vers’ awareness so that an auditory alarm might be preferable. How-
ever, auditory alarms are more annoying, especially when experienced
frequently (Campbell et al., 2007; Ho and Spence, 2008; ISO, 2005;
Lerner et al., 1996b; Marshall et al., 2007), as it was the case in the
present study and is common in real traﬃc with advanced in-vehicle
driver warnings of multiple stages. For further research on the speci-
ﬁcity of acoustic warning signals see Cummings et al. (2007); Klein
et al. (1992); Spence and Driver (1994); Xiang et al. (2016) or of visual
and acoustic warnings in comparison see Schwarz and Fastenmeier
(2017).
Consequently, it might be best to integrate the advantages of every
modality in a multi-modal warning approach (see Biondi et al., 2017;
Cao et al., 2010; Kramer et al., 2007; Liu et al., 1999). Varied combi-
nations of modalities are thinkable for diﬀerent warning stages. How-
ever, the scope of this study was to primarily investigate the design of
visual alerts. To be beneﬁcial, warning visualizations should be rather
simple, intuitive and easy to understand (Kiefer et al., 1999; Lerner
et al., 1996a, 1996b) since an increase in the cognitive demand of
warnings increases drivers’ reaction and detection time (Wolﬀsohn
et al., 1998). Laughery (2006), Wogalter et al. (2002) and Young (1991)
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
2

--- Page 3 ---
recommended using color and icons or pictorials to augment the sal-
ience and thus the noticeability of visual warnings. Moreover, familiar
traﬃc signs can help drivers to process, understand and in the end
handle safety-critical situations better (Alves et al., 2013; George et al.,
2012; Ng and Chan, 2008; Payre and Diels, 2018; Plavsic et al., 2009).
Therefore, colored traﬃc signs visualized all driver warning concepts.
Their red color and particular shape were to alert drivers additionally,
as suggested by Bhatia (2003), Campbell et al. (2004) and Young
(1991).
Where to locate in-vehicle driver assistances is also discussed in a lot
of studies (e.g., Benmimoun et al., 2007; Lee et al., 1999; Tsimhoni
et al., 2001; Wittmann et al., 2006; Yoo et al., 1999). This study used a
head-up display (HUD) to visualize all warning symbols. In contrast to
an instrument panel display or other so called head-down displays
(HDD), a HUD maintains the drivers’ gaze directed towards the road,
even when perceiving warnings, as they are projected into the wind-
shield right above the engine hood and overlap with the road reality in
their ﬁeld of view (see Hanowski et al., 1999; Horrey et al., 2003; Lee
et al., 1999; Luoma and Rämä, 2002). This renders drivers more likely
to see an external event needing their immediate attention, such as a
vehicle in their path (Alves et al., 2013; Tretten et al., 2011, also see
Wickens and Long, 1994), unless cognitive capture or visual masking
occur, for example due to visual clutter or contrast interference (Gish
and Staplin, 1995; Green et al., 2008; Ward and Parkes, 1994). How-
ever, if not designed user-friendly or integrated into the driving task
HUDs might also increase drivers’ work load which in turn might
narrow their attention (also called cognitive, visual or perceptual tun-
neling), shrink their ﬁeld of view and thus result in impaired peripheral
detection (see Dirkin, 1983; Gish and Staplin, 1995; Mackworth, 1965;
Sanders, 1970; Williams, 1985). In order to avoid such issues, the dis-
played information should be intuitively understandable so it can be
processed rapidly without distracting or straining the drivers ad-
ditionally. Since HUDs merely require eye accommodation, but no eye
or head movements, using them to present collision warnings can re-
duce drivers’ response time considerably and thus mean signiﬁcant
safety beneﬁts (Ablaßmeier et al., 2007; Azuma, 1997; Watanabe et al.,
1999).
In order to evaluate the diﬀerent warning concepts, situations cre-
ated to become safety-critical were implemented in the driving simu-
lator. According to accident analyses, the three most common accident
types in urban areas are caused by vehicles turning into a road or
crossing it (26%), moving along in carriageway (21%) and vehicles
turning oﬀa road (16%), making up almost two thirds of all traﬃc
accidents on German urban roads in 2013 (Statistisches Bundesamt,
2014). However, the most fatalities are entailed by vulnerable road
users crossing the road (27%), which is why these situations are usually
rated as very critical. Hence, similar constellations as described in the
accident analyses were realized. Some were newly elaborated. Others
were used from previous studies (Kazazi et al., 2016; Muhrer and
Vollrath, 2010; Powelleit and Vollrath, 2018; Werneke and Vollrath,
2012). For example, Kazazi et al. (2016) developed and analyzed
safety-critical incidents with respect to how drivers react and how they
can be supported by systematic collision warnings. In sum, eight sce-
narios (each including one safety-critical situation) were implemented
in the present study. This is a far greater number than in most ADAS
evaluations. Usually only one type of safety-critical situation is re-
garded (e.g., Ben-Yaacov et al., 2002; Benmimoun et al., 2007;
Horowitz and Dingus, 1992; Lee et al., 2002b; Werneke and Vollrath,
2013), which makes general recommendations, for instance on how to
design warning concepts, rather diﬃcult (if feasible at all). Kramer
et al. (2007) actually tested a collision avoidance system (yet in HDD
not HUD) in diﬀerent driving situations, but focused on higher speeds
without varying the safety-critical object contrary to this study. How-
ever, situations in the urban context are much more diverse than on
highways. This diversity was accounted for in the present driving si-
mulation, which additionally constrained expectancy eﬀects.
Drivers were exposed to every scenario twice to control for learning
eﬀects as repeated event exposure can inﬂuence drivers’ brake reactions
(Aust et al., 2013). Shinar and Schechtman (2002) and Ben-Yaacov
et al. (2002) also detected learning eﬀects for drivers using headway
feedback, leading to safer distances over time. Likewise, Koustanaï et al.
(2012) found that familiarization with a FCW improved drivers’ system
interaction and reaction time. Hence, similar eﬀects were expected for
this study. Besides, experiencing the warning concept in the same sce-
nario twice, allowed drivers to appraise the warning concept more
thoroughly for the subjective evaluations.
Summing up, this driving simulator study used eight safety-critical
situations (within-subjects factor scenario) in repetition (within-subjects
factor trial) to evaluate diﬀerent warning concepts (between-subjects
factor warning type) which support drivers in collision avoidance. The
aim of the study was to explore whether one warning cue can be used
for diﬀerent kinds of safety-critical situations, as found in the complex
environment of urban areas. Driving with a warning was to improve the
driving behavior over no warning being present. It was assumed that
the warning type would inﬂuence the drivers’ behavior and subjective
ratings, while its suitability might vary with the scenario.
2. Method
2.1. Driver warning
The basic aim of the examined warning concepts was to support
drivers in avoiding and mitigating collisions with safety-critical objects.
They were conveyed visually without additional acoustic or haptic
signals to eliminate masking the actual eﬀects of the diﬀerent warning
visualizations. The warnings were presented driver-centered in a si-
mulated multicolor HUD right above the engine hood, measuring
maximum 21 x 21 cm (6° visual angle).
As Table 1 shows, four diﬀerent warning types were developed ac-
cording to pilot tests within the HMI experts of the research project
“UR:BAN” (see Winkler et al., 2018b) and literature reviews (see 1
Introduction; e.g., Laughery, 2006; Laughery and Wogalter, 2006;
Naujoks and Neukum, 2014; Thoma et al., 2009; Wogalter et al., 2002).
They were presented to independent groups of subjects. While two of
them were to elicit an immediate driver reaction, either braking or
steering, the other two were to direct the drivers’ attention towards the
safety-critical objects and enable them to react adequately (warning
strategy: reaction- vs. attention-oriented). It was found that (red)
warning triangles attract drivers’ attention, but are of a more in-
formative than activating character compared to other symbols such as
stop symbols. Thus, warning triangles were used for an attention-or-
iented strategy and stop symbols for a reaction-oriented strategy. In
both strategies, warnings could either be generic or speciﬁc, with the
Table 1
Implemented warning types as visualized in the head-up display (HUD).
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
3

--- Page 4 ---
speciﬁc version giving more information to beneﬁt drivers’ response
selection, for example by displaying the type of hazardous object for
more deﬁnite attention allocation (attention speciﬁc) or the kind of
required reaction for more successful collision avoidance (reaction
speciﬁc).
According to that, the reaction speciﬁc (RS) warning advised drivers
to stop (via a stop sign) or to swerve around the safety-critical object
(via a “steer symbol”, see Table 1) when an evasive maneuver was
possible (as indicated in Table 2). The reaction generic (RG) warning
used a stop sign in all safety-critical situations. While the attention
generic (AG) warning displayed a red warning triangle with an ex-
clamation mark (caution sign), the speciﬁc version (AS) depicted the
relevant safety-critical object within a warning triangle (pedestrian,
bicyclist, lead vehicle or obstacle, see Table 1). In order to examine the
overall eﬀect of the diﬀerent warning types, a control group without any
warning was included as a baseline. For further aspects of the experi-
mental design, see Table 3.
In general, it was diﬃcult to agree on reaction-oriented symbols.
For example, a normal arrow traﬃc sign (mostly white on blue in
Germany) as “steer symbol” was considered not reaction-prompting
enough. Therefore, it was combined with a red-striped traﬃc cone to
display an actual obstacle that has to be avoided like in a slalom course.
Additionally,
developing
a
completely
generic
reaction-oriented
warning symbol (not speaking of other generic non-symbolic options
Table 2
Textual and pictorial depiction of the eight scenarios with the type of the safety-critical object, the location of its encounter and the warning onset.
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
4

--- Page 5 ---
like LED bars) was challenging, which is why the stop symbol is em-
ployed in the reaction generic and speciﬁc warning group.
2.2. Driving simulator and scenarios
The experiment was conducted in a static medium ﬁdelity driving
simulator of the Technische Universität Braunschweig (see Fig. 1). It
comprises a seat box with typical car interiors like car seats, a steering
wheel with force feedback, accelerator and brake pedals as well as three
LCD screens serving as rear-view mirrors. Surrounding the seat box at
about 2.1 m distance from the driver’s seat are three screens (ahead:
1.85 m x 2.10 m, left and right: 1.85 m x 2.20 m), onto which three
beamers (1400 × 1050 px resolution) project the virtual scenery, cre-
ated by the driving simulation software SILAB (from WIVW, Krüger
et al., 2005; see www.wivw.de). Thus, the drivers are provided with a
180° ﬁeld of view. Complementing the rather realistic driving im-
pression comparable to sitting in a real car, acoustical simulations of
traﬃc sounds like wind and engine noises complete the driving simu-
lation. Drivers had full lateral and longitudinal control over the vehicle.
The diﬀerent critical situations were embedded into an urban area
with a speed limit of 50 km/h. The main part of the track was more or
less straight, so as to reduce the risk of simulation sickness. Left or right
turns were indicated by a voice output and an arrow near the speed-
ometer in the instrument panel. Altogether eight scenarios were im-
plemented, each containing a safety-critical object. The scenarios dif-
fered by the object type (pedestrian, bicyclist, lead vehicle or hay bale),
its behavior dynamics ((crossing) direction and distance) and the lo-
cation of the encounter (intersection, straight road, curve or hill). Some
scenarios were adopted from previous studies (Kazazi et al., 2016;
Muhrer and Vollrath, 2010; Powelleit and Vollrath, 2018; Werneke and
Vollrath, 2012). Others were newly created according to accident
analyses (e.g., Great Britain Department for Transport, 2015; National
Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration, 2008; New Zealand Transport
Agency, 2014; Statistisches Bundesamt, 2014). Between the scenarios
drivers went mostly straight in normal urban traﬃc without further
critical incidents. Table 2 gives an overview of the eight scenarios
(whereby the vehicle of the participant is referred to as “ego vehicle”).
It indicates if the situation preferred an evasive maneuver by the dri-
vers, denoting in which scenario the reaction speciﬁc warning dis-
played the “steer symbol”. Even though a steering reaction might be
more advantageous in some critical situations, it is hard to evoke them
in drivers (see also Powelleit and Vollrath, 2018). Most drivers rather
brake upon potential hazards (Adams, 1994; Malaterre et al., 1988).
Nevertheless, this study included scenarios that welcomed evasive
maneuvers in order to test the speciﬁcity of the reaction-oriented
strategy.
Table 2 also speciﬁes when the warnings were activated. The trig-
gering of the safety-critical object and the warnings was chosen due to
pilot studies and based upon the ego vehicle crossing speciﬁed land-
marks. Due to technical constraints, the complexity and the diversity of
the scenarios, time-to-collision thresholds could not be used in this
study, but hopefully in future studies. The activation of the safety-cri-
tical objects (e.g., pedestrian moving, lead vehicle braking etc.) was to
result in critical situations and thus create a need for warnings in the
ﬁrst place. The warnings should then help drivers to react adequately in
order to avoid collisions with a safety-critical object or to keep situa-
tions from becoming really critical. In order to apply the warning
concepts to a wide variety of situations, the eight scenarios varied with
regard to the severity of the situation. For example, scenario PI asked
drivers for a more immediate de-escalation reaction than scenario OH.
In general, the scenarios bearing higher risks of fatalities and being
more time-critical were expected to be of a comparatively high situa-
tion criticality. However, a rather explorative approach was followed in
this matter. Achieving similar levels of criticality within a scenario for
every participant was a challenge in this experiment, as the driver be-
havior could not be completely controlled. This is especially relevant
right before the hazard activation. For example, drivers naturally keep
individual safety-distances to lead vehicles during following, so that a
sudden braking of a lead vehicle can have varied impacts and thus can
result in situations of diverse criticality. Even synchronizing the lead
vehicle’s speed entirely to the ego vehicle’s in pretests did not solve this
problem. Drivers only decelerated more and more, eventually being
unnaturally slow. Hence, this knowingly accepted random within-sub-
jects variation has to be respected when interpreting the results.
Table 3
Experimental plan of the within-subjects factors trial (2) and scenario (8), and the between-subjects factor warning type (5).
Fig. 1. Picture of the static medium ﬁdelity driving simulator.
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
5

--- Page 6 ---
2.3. Experimental design
The experiment followed a mixed design with three independent
variables (see Table 3). In order to examine the eﬀects of the four dif-
ferent warning types in comparison to a control group (see Table 1), a
between-subjects design was used for the independent variable warning
type (5). Thus, all drivers experienced the same kind of warning as as-
signed to their group (or none in the control group) in every one of the
eight scenarios (within-subjects factor scenario (8), see Table 2). Each
scenario was driven twice by every driver (within-subjects factor trial
(2): T1 and T2). So the drivers encountered critical events sixteen times
in total. The order of the eight scenarios was randomized to control for
time eﬀects. According to the warning type the ﬁve driver groups are
described as no warning (C), reaction-oriented generic (RG), reaction-
oriented speciﬁc (RS), attention-oriented generic (AG), attention-or-
iented speciﬁc (AS, see Tables 1 and 3). As for the RS warning, drivers
received a stop sign in the scenarios PI, BI, BT and OH, but a “steer
symbol” in the scenarios PS, LI, LS and OC as steering around the safety-
critical object was deemed more appropriate. The AS warning triangle
depicted a pedestrian in PI and PS, a bicyclist in BI and BT, a car in LI
and LS or a traﬃc cone in OC and OH to represent the relevant safety-
critical object depending on the scenario (see Table 3).
In order to describe the driver reactions to the warnings, the entire
driving behavior (e.g., position, speed, pedal and steering wheel ac-
tivity) was logged at a frequency of 60 Hz by the simulation software
SILAB (from WIVW; Krüger et al., 2005) of the driving simulator. Three
of such objective parameters were investigated in this paper (see
Table 4). With the major aim of the warnings to increase the traﬃc
safety, the number of collisions (later transformed into percentages),
the brake reaction time and the maximal applied brake force (brake
maximum) were analyzed. Contrary to plan, the steering behavior
could not be examined as drivers hardly showed any steering reactions
(see 4 Discussion). Moreover, gaze behavior data was recorded via
Dikablis eye tracking glasses and the according software from Ergo-
neers (Ergoneers, 2009; see www.ergoneers.com) in order to see what
drivers ﬁxate when, in which order and for how long (e.g., the road, the
hazard or the warning). With a view to investigate how the warnings
supported directing the driver’s attention, the gaze behavior was eval-
uated with the automated software (D-Lab). However, since the HUD
often overlaid the safety-critical object in the drivers’ ﬁeld of view and
even manual evaluation proved to be on the verge of speculation in
many cases (especially with bigger surface hazards), further analyses of
the gaze behavior were refrained from for now. Nevertheless, some
results for the most critical scenario PS (pedestrian crossing a straight
road) can be found in Winkler et al. (2015).
In order to measure the acceptance of the warning concepts by the
drivers, subjective evaluations were conducted, including questions on
how well the drivers understood the meaning of the warnings and how
helpful the warnings were (see Table 4). Additionally, drivers rated the
situations in order to examine to what extent the scenarios diﬀered in
their criticality (manipulation check). All three subjective ratings fol-
lowed a two-stage procedure. Drivers ﬁrst chose one out of ﬁve labeled
categories and then reﬁned their rating by selecting one out of three
subcategories (-, 0, +) on the 15-point rating scale (see Fig. 2; Heller,
1982). This rating was then transformed into numbers from 1 to 15
(“very low” to “very high”). Afterwards a brief interview veriﬁed the
understanding of the warnings’ meanings.
2.4. Participants
Out of sixty-six drivers recruited through ﬂyers, mailing lists and an
existing pool of simulator drivers, six had to be excluded due to simulation
sickness in the simulator training required for participation, resulting in a
total of sixty drivers (27 female, 33 male, M = 23.7 years, SD = 3.7 years)
completing the test. Their driving experience was on average 5.7 years
(SD = 3.6 years). Their annual mileage was mainly less than 3000 km
since a large amount of drivers was university students without a car of
their own. All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal visual acuity
and were compensated for successful participation with 12 € or course
credits (if psychology students).
2.5. Procedure
After a welcome, participants were instructed in written form about
the objectives of the experiment (“investigation of driving and gaze be-
havior as well as subjective ratings in complex urban situations to derive
driver assistances”). They provided informed consent by signature and
ﬁlled in a demographic questionnaire. All participants drove a training
drive of 15 min to familiarize with the simulator as they would with a
new car. Then they received two more instructions: (1) indicated that
critical situations might occur (“You will drive through several urban
scenarios now, from which critical situations might arise.”) and (2) in-
troduced the subjective rating procedure. The drivers with warning
support were additionally instructed that they were assisted by HUD
collision warnings. The exact design though was not further explained
to test for intuitive understanding. Then the test drive followed, com-
prising two ca. 15 min trials of eight scenarios each (T1 and T2), in-
terrupted only by a short break. After every scenario participants came
to a short halt (as initiated by a banner on the front screen) to rate three
subjective items on a touch screen in the center panel at the height of a
car radio. The experiment concluded with a brief interview to verify the
actual understanding of the warning symbols. Finally, the drivers were
thanked and compensated for their participation. The entire experiment
lasted about one and a half hour.
2.6. Data analysis
For the data analysis IBM SPSS Statistics 23 was used. At ﬁrst, the
subjective ratings of the situation criticality were analyzed by a mixed
design ANOVA (with post-hoc pairwise comparisons) including the two
within-subjects factors trial and scenario, and the between-subjects
factor warning type. This served as manipulation check of whether the
very low
rather low
moderate
rather high
very high
-
0
+
-
0
+
-
0
+
-
0
+
-
0
+
Fig. 2. Two-stage rating scale by Heller (1982) to measure all subjective vari-
ables.
Table 4
Dependent measures analyzed in this paper.
Objective variables
Unit
Description
Collision frequency
%
Number of times the ego vehicle crashed into the
safety-critical object on encounter
Brake reaction time
s
Time from warning onset (notional in the control
group) until the brake pedal is pressed (≥0.2 s,
including collision incidents)
Brake maximum
%
Maximum pressing of the brake pedal after
warning onset until the speed is zero or the brake
pedal is released again (in percent of the sample
maximum)
Subjective variables
Description [1 (very low, -) … 15 (very high, +);
Heller, 1982]
Situation criticality
“How critical was the experienced situation?”
Warning
understand-
ability
“How understandable was the warning in the
experienced situation?”
Warning
helpfulness
“How helpful was the warning in the experienced
situation?”
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
6

--- Page 7 ---
scenarios actually diﬀered from each other and allowed ordering the
scenarios in a sensible way. Subsequently, the collision frequency was
investigated by a binary logistic regression within the framework of
generalized estimating equations (GEE), in order to analyze possible
main eﬀects of the three ﬁxed-eﬀect factors trial, scenario and warning
type. No interaction terms were included in the model (failure to con-
verge on all criteria). The GEE regarded participants as a random eﬀect
and applied an exchangeable covariance structure. Compared to a lo-
gistic regression, the GEE framework allows predicting categorical
variables (like collision: yes/no) based on repeated-measures data.
In order to investigate the drivers’ brake behavior, the brake reac-
tion time and brake maximum were employed. However, in some oc-
casions decelerating merely by releasing the gas pedal, without actually
pressing the brake pedal, was a suﬃcient reaction. Hence, in almost
16% of all safety-critical object encounters the drivers did either not
initiate a brake reaction or a very late one, so that these data were
treated as outliers and thus excluded from the data analysis (brake
reaction time cutoﬀvalue of 2.9 s at a g-level of 3.0). This case occurred
particularly often in scenario PI, LI and both bicyclist scenarios (see
Table 5). Other times participants reacted before the warning onset or
in less than 0.2 s, which was assumed to be the minimum time to brake
upon the warning presentation. Primarily scenario LI fell into this ca-
tegory, with half of the data points being lost to these circumstances
(see Table 5). All of the problematic scenarios featured an intersection.
That is to say, drivers might have already slowed down in anticipation
of approaching a complex situation by the time the warning appeared
or were still driving slowly while crossing the intersection not ne-
cessitating a (fast) brake reaction. All these cases were excluded from
the examination of the brake reaction time and brake maximum, re-
spectively. Overall 77% of all data points were included for both
parameters (see Table 5). The number of participants (n) included per
group is hence always given at the bottom of a chart and has to be born
in mind when interpreting the following results of the brake reaction
time and brake maximum. Of course, certain scenarios like LI or BT
could have been excluded from the analysis entirely due to the small
number of useable data points, but as the eﬀects did not change either
way, they were further included in favor of a more thorough picture
over all scenarios.
Due to the dissimilar numbers of participants in the groups an un-
balanced model was used for data examination. Therefore, the brake
reaction time and maximum were analyzed by a linear mixed model
(based on restricted maximum likelihood (REML) estimations), refer-
ring to the participants as a random eﬀect. Regarding the two within-
subjects factors trial and scenario, and the between-subjects factor
warning type as ﬁxed eﬀects all possible two-/three-way interactions
and the three main eﬀects were included in the model. Compound
symmetry was chosen as the repeated covariance type. Finally, like the
situation criticality the subjective ratings of the warning under-
standability and helpfulness (comprising only the four groups receiving
a warning, thus excluding the control group without a warning) were
analyzed by two mixed design ANOVAs (with post-hoc pairwise com-
parisons) including all three factors (trial and scenario as within-subjects
factors; warning type as between-subjects factor).
All presented means are given with 95% conﬁdence intervals (CI) as
margins of error. If sphericity was violated, the Greenhouse-Geisser
corrected degrees of freedom were used. For signiﬁcant results of the
ANOVA and the GEE, η² or r respectively, are given as measures of the
eﬀect size. A signiﬁcance level of p ≤.05 was adopted in all statistical
tests. All post-hoc pairwise comparisons were Bonferroni corrected.
Finally, the results of all dependent measures are accumulated in a
descriptive summary to give an overview of the warning type diﬀerences
over all scenarios.
3. Results
3.1. Subjective ratings of the scenarios (situation criticality)
All results of the 2 × 8 × 5 mixed ANOVA of the subjectively rated
situation criticality of each scenario for both within-subjects factors trial
and scenario, and the between-subjects factor warning type are reported
in Table 6. The analysis showed a signiﬁcant interaction between the
two factors scenario and trial as well as a signiﬁcant main eﬀect of the
scenario and a marginally signiﬁcant trial main eﬀect. No further sig-
niﬁcant main eﬀects or interactions between any factors were found. As
Fig. 3 shows, scenario PS (pedestrian crossing on straight road) was the
most critical, being rated very high. It was followed by scenario BI (bi-
cyclist crossing at left turn) and the ﬁrst trial of scenario PI (pedestrian
crossing at left turn), both being rated rather high in situation criticality.
Scenarios of moderate criticality were the second trial of PI, the sce-
narios BT (bicyclist crossing after right turn), LI (lead vehicle stopping
at intersection) and OH (obstacle behind a hill) as well as the second
trial of LS (lead vehicle braking on straight road). Of rather low criti-
cality was the ﬁrst trial of scenario LS and both trials of scenario OC
(obstacle blocking road behind curve). The situation criticality changed
about one scale point over the trials, while the eﬀect direction diﬀered
with the scenario (see Fig. 3). The results of the multiple comparisons
for the signiﬁcant factor scenario are displayed in Table A1 in Appendix
A. All further diagrams order the scenarios according to their described
situation criticality.
3.2. Collisions
The GEE of the collision frequency (including all three main eﬀects
of the within-subjects factors trial and scenario, and the between-sub-
jects factor warning type) showed two main eﬀects, for the within-sub-
jects factors scenario (X²(7) = 118.76, p < .001, r = 0.35) and trial
(X²(1) = 5.14, p = .023, r = 0.07), but no main eﬀect for the between-
subjects factor warning type (X²(4) = 5.92, p = .205). Interactions could
not be analyzed due to statistical constraints (see 2.6 Data analysis).
Overall, the number of crashes was quite low with about 13%. A total of
120 collisions at 960 encounters of safety-critical objects was recorded.
5% less collisions occurred in the second trial compared to the ﬁrst. In
the most critically rated scenario PS almost half of all event encounters
resulted in a collision with the pedestrian crossing the straight road.
The second largest number of collisions, amounting to about a quarter
of all encounters, occurred in scenario BI (bicyclist crossing at left turn),
Table 5
Number of data points perscenario included (valid) and excluded from the brake reaction examination (due to no apparent brake reaction to the warnings (none) or a
brake reaction time of > 2.9 s or < 0.2 s).
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
7

--- Page 8 ---
followed by the scenarios PI (pedestrian crossing at left turn) and LI
(lead vehicle stopping at intersection) with a collision frequency of 12%
each. No collisions were found in the scenarios BT (bicyclist crossing
after T-section), OH and OC (obstacle behind hill and curve), and al-
most none in scenario LS (lead vehicle braking on straight road: 3%).
These diﬀerences in the collision frequency between the scenarios are
in line with the above described situation criticality ratings of the dri-
vers (except for scenario LI).
3.3. Driving behavior (brake reaction time and brake maximum)
All results of the linear mixed model analysis of the brake reaction
time and the brake maximum (including all factorial eﬀects of both
within-subjects factors trial and scenario, and the between-subjects
factor warning type) are reported in Table 7. The analysis showed a
signiﬁcant interaction eﬀect of scenario and warning type as well as
signiﬁcant main eﬀects of all three factors on the brake reaction time.
No further interactions became signiﬁcant. Drivers initiated a 0.16 s
earlier brake reaction in the second trial compared to the ﬁrst trial (T1:
M = 1.20 s ± 0.05 s, n = 374; T2: M = 1.04 s ± 0.04 s, n = 366). So
the repeated exposure led to faster driver reactions, but this learning
eﬀect did not interact with the scenario or the warning type eﬀect. The
fastest brake reactions across all scenarios were found when a pedes-
trian crossed a straight road in scenario PS (see Fig. 4), which left the
least amount of time to react (not accounting for scenario LI – lead
vehicle stopping at intersection – in which more than half of the drivers
initiated a brake reaction before the warning onset, see 2.6 Data ana-
lysis, leading to wide conﬁdence intervals for the small amount of in-
cluded participants). Scenario PS diﬀered signiﬁcantly from all other
scenarios (exempt LI) in the shown brake reaction time according to
post-hoc tests (p≤.001). The results of all post-hoc pairwise compar-
isons of the brake reaction time and the brake maximum for the
signiﬁcant factor scenario can be found in Table A1 in Appendix A.
As Fig. 4 illustrates, warned drivers mostly had faster brake reac-
tions than drivers without assistance (control: C), reaching signiﬁcance
in post-hoc pairwise comparisons for the signiﬁcant factor warning type
(C-RG: p = .001; C-RS: p = .014; C-AG: p = .019; C-AS: p = .007). The
brake reaction time between the four driver groups who received a
warning though did not diﬀer signiﬁcantly due to the warning type itself
in post-hoc tests. Their eﬃcacy and the degree of diﬀerentiation be-
tween the warning concepts depended on the scenario. As Fig. 4 shows,
descriptively the attention speciﬁc (AS) and reaction generic (RG)
warnings often led to the fastest reactions. While the brake reaction
time over all warning concepts was quite comparable in the most cri-
tically rated scenario PS, AS warning was more beneﬁcial in very and
rather critical scenarios like BI and PI, and RG warning more in sce-
narios of moderate to rather low situation criticality like OH, LS or OC.
Similar to the brake reaction results, the mixed-model analysis for
the brake maximum showed a signiﬁcant interaction between the fac-
tors scenario and warning type. Both factors also led to signiﬁcant main
eﬀects in the brake maximum, whereas contrary to the brake reaction
results the factor trial did not (see Table 7). There were no further
signiﬁcant interactions.
As Fig. 5 illustrates, drivers’ brake maximum varied widely over the
warning types, but especially over the scenarios. While some scenarios
prompted brake maxima within the upper third, other scenarios only
induced slight braking within the lower third (for results of the multiple
comparisons between the scenarios see Table A1 in Appendix A). As
Fig. 5 shows, the RG (reaction generic) warning group mostly reached
the highest value, aside from scenario LI with the lead vehicle stopping
at an intersection (highest value from the only two includable data
points in the control group) and BI (bicyclist crossing at left turn), in
which the closely following AS (attention speciﬁc) warning group had
the highest values instead. When comparing the warning types in post-
hoc tests, only the RG warning diﬀered signiﬁcantly from other warning
types, namely from the control group and the RS (reaction speciﬁc)
warning group (RG-C: p = .007; RG-RS: p = .001; see Fig. 5).
3.4. Subjective ratings of the warnings (understandability and helpfulness)
All results of the 2 × 8 × 5 mixed ANOVA of the subjectively rated
warning understandability and helpfulness for the within-subjects fac-
tors trial and scenario, and the between-subjects factor warning type are
reported in Table 8. The analysis of the warning understandability
showed a signiﬁcant interaction eﬀect of the factors scenario and
warning type. Moreover, each of the three factors itself had a main eﬀect
on the warning understandability. No further interactions were found.
Drivers rated the warning concepts more understandable in the
second trial than in the ﬁrst (T1: M = 9.8 ± 0.4; T2: M = 10.5 ± 0.3),
but both times the understandability was rather high. As Fig. 6 illus-
trates, the reaction generic (RG) and the attention speciﬁc (AS) warning
were understood best in most of the scenarios. Moreover, post-hoc
Table 6
ANOVA results for all interaction and main eﬀects of the within-subjects factors
trial (T) and scenario (S), and the between-subjects factor warning type (W) on
the subjective ratings of the situation criticality (signiﬁcant p-values in bold).
Situation criticality
Eﬀect
F
df
p
n2
T
3.46
1,55
0.068
0.06
S
75.58
5.4,295.6
< .0001
0.58
W
1.09
4,55
0.371
0.07
T × S
2.97
5.4,295.6
0.01
0.05
T × W
1.11
4,55
0.361
0.75
S × W
0.57
21.5,295.6
0.936
0.04
T × S × W
0.87
21.5,295.6
0.639
0.06
Fig. 3. Mean subjective ratings of the situation criticality (with 95% CI) per trial
and scenario.
Table 7
Linear mixed model results for all interaction and main eﬀects of the within-
subjects factors trial (T) and scenario (S), and the between-subjects factor
warning type (W) on the brake reaction time and brake maximum (signiﬁcant p-
values in bold).
Brake reaction time
Brake maximum
Eﬀect
F
df
p
F
df
p
T
23.96
1,630
0.068
0
1,618
0.068
S
17.8
7,616
< .0001
84.71
7,611
< .0001
W
4.97
4,64
0.371
4.7
4,60
0.371
T × S
1.47
7,615
0.01
0.88
7,611
0.01
T × W
0.47
4,621
0.361
1.6
4,614
0.361
S × W
1.94
28,615
0.936
2.21
28,611
0.936
T × S × W
0.95
27,613
0.639
0.47
27,610
0.639
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
8

--- Page 9 ---
pairwise comparisons for the warning type showed that the AS warning
was understood signiﬁcantly better than the reaction speciﬁc (RS) or
attention generic (AG) warning (AS-RS and AS-AG: p = .016), while no
signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found for the RG warning (RG-RS and RG-
AG: p = .142). Further pairwise comparisons for the factor scenario are
reported in Table A1 in Appendix A. Mainly scenario LI (lead vehicle
stopping at intersection) diﬀered signiﬁcantly from the other scenarios.
Its quite low warning understandability rating though might go along
with many drivers braking before warning onset and thus not under-
standing the need for a warning activation in general (as indicated in
post-hoc interviews).
Regarding the warning helpfulness there was a signiﬁcant main
eﬀect of the within-subjects factor scenario and a marginally signiﬁcant
interaction between the factors trial and scenario. No further main ef-
fects or interactions were found. Fig. 7 shows that the warning help-
fulness was averagely rated moderate (8) to rather high (10) in all sce-
narios, except for scenario LI (lead vehicle stopping at intersection), in
which the warning helpfulness was the lowest (6, rather low to 7,
moderate) compared to all other scenarios (LI-PS: p = .054; LI-BI:
p = .027; LI-PI: p < .001; LI-BT: p < .001; LI-OH: p < .001; LI-LS:
p = .111; LI-OC: p = .001). This relates to the number of data points
excluded due to drivers initiating a brake reaction before warning onset
(being 50%, see 2.6 Data analysis). The scenario main eﬀect might
hence be strongly correlated to the low helpfulness in scenario LI. As
can be seen in Fig. 7, except for the two obstacle scenarios (OH and
OC), the warning helpfulness increased in all scenarios with time. Post-
hoc driver interviews indicated that the warning in these speciﬁc sce-
narios was not always necessary as drivers sometimes recognized the
safety-critical object before the warning was presented.
3.5. General results
Table 9 summarizes the results by reporting the mean of every
measured parameter in each scenario as well as the most and least ef-
fective warning types. As illustrated, the subjectively rated situation
criticality was signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the within-subjects factor sce-
nario, which also interacted with the within-subjects factor trial. All
scenarios actually diﬀered from each other, allowing ordering them
according to their situation criticality ratings. As Table 9 shows, sce-
nario PS clearly bordered the situation criticality rating on the upper
end (M = 13, very high) and scenario OC on the lower end (M = 6,
rather low). While most scenarios were rated less critical when experi-
enced again, this eﬀect was inversed for both bicyclist scenarios (BI and
BT) and LS (lead vehicle stopping on straight road).
As can be seen in Table 9, the total crash rate was quite low. It
decreased signiﬁcantly over time and diﬀered signiﬁcantly with the
Fig. 4. Mean brake reaction time (with 95% CI) per scenario and warning type (n at the base of each bar).
Fig. 5. Mean brake maximum (with 95% CI) per scenario and warning type (n at the base of each bar).
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
9

--- Page 10 ---
factor scenario. The largest number of collisions was found in scenario
PS (48%), about half as much in scenario BI (27%) and just a fourth of
that in the scenarios PI and LI each (12%). No collisions were found in
scenario BT and both obstacle scenarios (OH and OC), while 3% oc-
curred in LS. The warning type did not aﬀect the collision frequency.
Nevertheless, Fig. 8 (left) illustrates that descriptively the control group
(C) was involved in the largest number of collisions (17%) and the
reaction generic (RG) warning group in the least (8%).
Besides the between-subjects factor warning type and the within-
subjects factor scenario interacting signiﬁcantly for the three parameters
brake reaction time, brake maximum and the subjectively rated
warning understandability, each of the two factors also had a sig-
niﬁcant main eﬀect (see Table 9). Thus, there is no clear overall best
warning type to be identiﬁed as the diﬀerences between the warning
types varied with the scenarios. However, drivers in the control (C)
group without warning support almost always showed slower, less
strong brake reactions than warned drivers (brake reaction time:
MC = 1.4 s ± 0.1 s; brake maximum: MC = 45% ± 6%). Only the re-
action speciﬁc (RS) warning group achieved similarly low brake
maxima (MRS = 46% ± 5%, see Fig. 8, left). As Table 9 and Fig. 8 il-
lustrate
descriptively,
the
reaction
generic
(RG)
and
attention
speciﬁc
(AS)
warnings
led
to
the
fastest
and
strongest
brake
reactions
over
all
scenarios
(brake
reaction:
MRG
= 1.03 s ± 0.06 s
and
MAS = 1.05 s ± 0.08 s;
brake
maximum:
MRG = 68% ± 4% and MAS = 60 ± 5%), while being understood best
(both rated rather high, M = 11 ± 0.4). Moreover, there were many
signiﬁcant pairwise comparisons for the factor scenario in all three
named parameters (see Table A1 in Appendix A). Scenario LI altogether
diﬀered clearly from most other scenarios.
Additionally, the within-subjects factor trial had a signiﬁcant main
eﬀect on the brake reaction time and the subjectively rated warning
understandability. Like the collision frequency, the brake reaction time
decreased in the second trial, whereas the warning understandability
increased with time. Similar to the situation criticality, the within-
subjects factors trial and scenario interacted marginally for the sub-
jectively rated warning helpfulness, with an additional signiﬁcant main
eﬀect of the factor scenario. It increased towards the second trial in
almost all scenarios, except for the obstacle scenarios. This might cor-
relate with the fact that both scenarios were of moderate to rather low
situation criticality (see Table 9). Additionally, all warnings were
Table 8
ANOVA results for all interaction and main eﬀects of the within-subjects factors trial (T) and scenario (S), and the between-subjects factor warning type (W) on the
warning understandability and helpfulness (signiﬁcant p-values in bold).
Warning understandability
Warning helpfulness
Eﬀect
F
df
p
r
F
df
p
r
T
14.91
1,44
< .0001
0.25
2.33
1,44
1.34
0.05
S
6.67
5.0,222.0
< .0001
0.13
5.35
4.5,197.5
< .0001
0.11
W
5.32
3,44
.003
0.27
1.04
3,44
.384
0.07
T × S
0.75
7,308
.629
0.02
2.17
5.0,219.7
.058
0.05
T × W
0.53
3,44
.665
0.04
0.09
3,44
.964
0.01
S × W
5.84
15.1,222.0
< .0001
0.29
1.52
13.5,197.5
.110
0.09
T × S × W
0.98
21,308
.493
0.06
0.81
15.0,219.7
.666
0.05
Fig. 6. Mean subjective ratings of the warning understandability (with 95% CI) per scenario and warning type.
Fig. 7. Mean subjective ratings of the warning helpfulness per trial and scenario
(with 95% CI).
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
10

--- Page 11 ---
moderately helpful independent of the assigned warning group (see
Fig. 8, right). A three-way interaction of all three factors was found
nowhere.
4. Discussion
The present driving simulator study investigated how diﬀerent
concepts of a visual driver warning (warning type) inﬂuence objective
variables such as collision frequency, brake reaction time and brake
maximum as well as subjective variables like warning understandability
and helpfulness in repeated trials of eight safety-critical situations
(scenario). The aim of these driver warnings was to support drivers in
various urban situations that might pose hazards to the traﬃc safety
(accident prevention and mitigation). For example, it should help dri-
vers to show a very fast and strong brake reaction in a highly critical
situation of a pedestrian crossing the ego vehicle’s path out of a sudden.
All scenarios diﬀered clearly in the drivers’ ratings of the situation
criticality (ranging from rather low to very high), requiring diﬀerent
driver reactions for collision avoidance. Likewise, all other measured
parameters (quantitative and qualitative) varied due to the factor
Table 9
Overview of the signiﬁcant eﬀects of the factors trial (T), scenario (S) and warning type (W) in the measured parameters (with overall means per scenario and
descriptively most/least eﬀective warning types by order, if warning type was signiﬁcant).
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
C
RG
RS
AG
AS
Brake reaction time [s]
Collision frequency
Brake maximum
Brake reaction time
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
RG
RS
AG
AS
Subjective rating
[1 (very low, -) ... 15 (very high, +)]
Warning understandability
Warning helpfulness
Fig. 8. Objective variables (n at the bottom, left) and subjective variables (right) per warning type (with 95% CI).
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
11

--- Page 12 ---
scenario (see Table 9). While the safety-critical situation in scenario PS
(pedestrian crossing straight road) made emergency braking necessary,
the same quick and strong brake reaction would have been in-
appropriate in scenario OC (obstacle behind curve), in which a gas
pedal release or a moderate brake reaction was suﬃcient. Therefore,
the scenarios established an appropriate framework to investigate the
diﬀerent strategies and speciﬁcities of the warning concepts (as varied
by the warning type) and their general eﬀectiveness. However, it should
be noted that the used scenarios are not a representative sample of
typical accident-prone urban scenarios, which is why the results cannot
serve to estimate safety eﬀects of such warning systems in real-world
traﬃc. Nevertheless, they allow assessing whether certain warning
systems are able to cover a wide and typical range of safety-critical
situations requiring diﬀerent driver reactions.
However, interpretations in scenario LI (lead vehicle stopping at
intersection) have to be handled with care due to a quite high variance
in the driving behavior within the scenario (especially right before
hazard encounter). On the one hand, there were participants driving
particularly carefully (e.g., with very low speeds and large safety dis-
tances), so that some situations did not become critical in the ﬁrst place.
On the other hand, a few drivers drove rather riskily in this scenario
and reached a criticality and time frame in which the vehicle might take
over control intervening for instance with automatic emergency
braking (Muhrer et al., 2012). Nevertheless, such interventions were
not focused here. The concerned warning concepts still surrendered the
vehicle control to the drivers as that way false alarms might be more
forgivable. However, interventions should be included when the pre-
sent results are integrated in future multi-stage warning systems. Con-
cluding, scenario LI would have to be adjusted for further evaluations,
while the other seven scenarios could be well recommended for such
purposes. Still, the variation within the individual scenarios due to
naturally diﬀerent driver behavior was a drawback that has to be ac-
knowledged.
As expected, drivers signiﬁcantly reacted slightly faster, avoided
somewhat more collisions and understood the warning concepts a bit
better with increasing experience over time, whereas the maximal ap-
plied brake force stayed unchanged over the two trials. However, in
general the warning concepts seemed to be intuitively understandable
from the start and did not need familiarization, except for when the
reaction speciﬁc (RS) warning instead of the stop symbol displayed the
“steer symbol”, a cone topped by an arrow pointing sideways (for
evasive maneuvers in the scenarios PS, LI, LS – lead vehicle stopping on
straight road – and OC). 42% of the drivers in the reaction speciﬁc (RS)
warning group could not explain the meaning of the “steer symbol”
with certainty or had wrong associations in post-hoc interviews (such as
“steer symbol” for static obstacles, stop symbol for moving ones).
Additionally, the RS warning resulted in rather low brake maxima
compared to the other warning types. On the one hand, this makes sense
as it was to elicit steering reactions rather than brake reactions. On the
other hand, none but one of the drivers in the whole experiment (who
was not even assigned to the RS warning group) actually showed an
evasive maneuver, despite it being a valid alternative.
So the “steer symbol” should be redesigned and have a more action-
prompting character to evaluate a RS warning approach including
evasive maneuvers closer. For example, Maag et al. (2015) found more
promising results with their “steer symbol” (depicting a road with lanes
and a steering wheel topped with arrows in the HUD). Yet, in a study
aimed at only evasive maneuvers drivers might have been generally
more likely to react by steering than they normally would. Other studies
showed that drivers universally tend to brake rather than steer in
safety-critical situations (see Adams, 1994; Malaterre et al., 1988).
Thus, prompting evasive maneuvers seems hard to achieve through
visual warnings only. Haptic or multimodal signals or even automatic
vehicle interventions might be better approaches to evasive maneuvers
in a later warning stage before an imminent collision (Fricke et al.,
2015; Maag et al., 2015; Schneider et al., 2015). On the other hand, the
safety-critical situations themselves might have provided insuﬃcient
cues to induce steering responses. For example, scenario OC (obstacle
blocking road behind curve) welcomed a steering reaction as there was
no oncoming traﬃc, but the early warning onset might also have fa-
cilitated more familiar (or reliable) brake reactions. Besides, as men-
tioned before it was diﬃcult to ﬁnd generic warning symbols that elicit
driver reactions, which is why the stop symbol was used to elicit a
generic reaction in the reaction generic (RG) warning and a brake re-
action in the reaction speciﬁc (RS) warning. Thus, the stop symbol in
RG might not entirely be understood as a generic warning, but it was
used in a generic way as it did not adapt and was displayed throughout
every scenario.
Unfortunately, the collision frequency was not inﬂuenced sig-
niﬁcantly by the visual driver warnings. Descriptively, the reaction
generic (RG) warning with the stop symbol though led to the least
amount of collisions, while the control group without a warning had the
most. In general, the crash rate was quite low, which also did not leave
much variance to be explained. This could be due to the frequent en-
counter of hazards in the experiment. On the one hand, this allowed
evaluating warning concepts in diverse situations (instead of just one
use case) to further extend its applicability to various kinds of situa-
tions. On the other hand, this meant that drivers experienced critical
incidents in a considerably higher frequency than in everyday traﬃc.
Thus, they were probably more attentive and careful than they would
normally be or even stressed, which might have aﬀected the results. The
fact that the study was situated in the laboratory environment of a
driving simulator instead of in the ﬁeld (as discussed in Lee et al.,
2002a) might have also contributed to this. Whether a collision occurs
highly depends on the dynamics of a vehicle (e.g., speed, lateral and
longitudinal distances, steering angle) which are often not suﬃciently
represented in simulators. So collision frequencies measured in the si-
mulator are limited in their external validity. However, the drivers’
brake behavior is rather comparable to real driving and is thus con-
sidered a more reliable measure for generalizations to the real world
(see Boda et al., 2018).
Moreover, drivers expected safety-critical situations to occur as they
were instructed to rate the situation criticality. However, it was diﬃcult
to anticipate (especially in the ﬁrst trial) what the actual safety-critical
situations might look like and where they might appear as the situations
were various and randomized in order. Nevertheless, the actual ex-
perience of collisions might still have inﬂuenced subjective ratings,
such as concerning the situation criticality. Besides, driving simulator
studies are quite complex and have to deal with simulation sickness,
which is why some participants had to be substituted. Yet, the labora-
tory environment enabled better to control disturbing factors and
trigger safety-critical events and warnings, especially without actually
harming anyone. Still, it would be interesting to see whether similar
eﬀects could be found if the warning concepts were implemented in real
traﬃc.
The results further showed that the drivers’ brake reactions and the
warning understandability (not its helpfulness) were signiﬁcantly in-
ﬂuenced by the warning type and its interaction with the scenario. All
warning concepts were eﬀective in reducing the brake reaction time
signiﬁcantly, despite it also signiﬁcantly decreasing somewhat over
time. The reaction generic (RG) warning with a stop symbol ad-
ditionally increased the maximal applied brake force compared to no
warning. The RG and the attention speciﬁc (AS) warning (with a
warning triangle depicting the hazard) were rated highest on the
warning understandability scale (both M = 11, rather high). Beyond
that, the AS warning was signiﬁcantly better understood than the re-
action speciﬁc (RS) warning (M = 9, moderate), which alternated be-
tween a stop and a “steer symbol”, and the attention generic (AG)
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
12

--- Page 13 ---
warning (M = 10, rather high) with an exclamation mark in a warning
triangle. Overall, the warning understandability increased signiﬁcantly
towards the second trial.
Still, the eﬃcacy of the diﬀerent warning concepts clearly altered
with the scenario. This is an important implication for the design of
warnings as well as for the methodology in future research. It proved
the assumption that common testing of driver assistance systems in a
limited number or diversity of use cases is insuﬃcient. Diﬀerent driver
responses were elicited by various combinations of scenarios and
warnings. So one and the same warning type can lead to varied driving
behavior and situation criticality ratings depending on the scenario. Yet,
driver can also adapt their behavior to diﬀerent warnings in the very
same safety-critical situation. ADAS thus have to be tested in a wider
manner.
Other implications concern the warning design. While the reaction
generic (RG) and attention speciﬁc (AS) warnings often led to one of the
fastest and strongest brake reactions, AS warning was somewhat better
in rather critical scenarios and RG warning in lesser critical scenarios,
respectively. However, the RG warning always led to one of the highest
brake maxima by drivers in all scenarios (except for the conspicuous
scenario LI). As both warning types though did not signiﬁcantly diﬀer
from each other in any measured parameter, either one might be re-
commended as overall best warning concept. Yet, the AS warning might
make comparatively greater demands on the quick identiﬁcation of
hazards (in terms of accuracy and latency) in order to display the
correct object type within the warning triangle. This is still work in
progress though. Detecting safety-critical objects, classifying them and
especially predicting their future behavior, such as whether there is a
tree swaying in the wind or a pedestrian bending forward in an attempt
to cross the road, is still a challenge to current technologies and system
developers (see Cordts et al., 2017; Diederichs et al., 2018; Schmidt and
Färber, 2009). An incorrectly displayed warning symbol can be quite
distracting and cause acceptance problems (Abe and Richardson, 2006;
Horowitz and Dingus, 1992; Naujoks et al., 2016). Since such false
alarms might be more likely with the AS warning, the RG warning
might be preferable due to its generic display (especially in time-critical
situations). In general, false alarms were not part of this study, which
should be kept in mind regarding the results. Drivers always associated
an actual hazard to the situations. This limits the ecological validity of
the study and should thus be included in a next step.
A lot of drivers also reacted before the warning was triggered or
drove in a way that hindered some situations from becoming critical in
the planned way so that the number of data points included per sce-
nario and warning group vary more or less. This should be taken into
account for result interpretation. Furthermore, the warning system
(with its diﬀerent warning strategies and speciﬁcities) should be tested
with other driver groups like older, experienced or impaired drivers. On
the one hand, driving related skills like regarding attention allocation,
information perception, processing and action execution can deterio-
rate with increasing age and impairments (e.g., Caird et al., 2007;
Piersma, 2018; Rackoﬀ, 1974; Schlag, 1993; Yan et al., 2007). On the
other hand, driving experience can improve drivers’ hazard perception
and thus their crash involvement (Borowsky and Oron-Gilad, 2013;
Borowsky et al., 2009; Malone and Brünken, 2016; Pradhan et al.,
2009). Hence, drivers might need diﬀerent support (by warnings) in
various hazardous situations depending on factors such as age, ﬁtness
to drive or driving experience.
Despite the named limitations, the results of the study contribute to
a wider knowledge of how to design driver warnings and how drivers
react when confronted with diﬀerent kinds of hazards. As there was a
positive eﬀect of the developed assistance (warnings displayed in the
HUD) on the driving behavior (faster and stronger brake reactions), the
severity of possible collisions could be reduced. The reaction generic
(RG) stop symbol and the attention speciﬁc (AS) hazard depiction
within a warning triangle were most eﬀective in eliciting faster and
stronger driver reactions. Clear diﬀerences between the individual
warning concepts though could not be found throughout all measured
parameters. Descriptively, the RG warning led to the least collisions, the
RG and AS warning to the fastest brake reactions and RG to the
strongest ones, while both were understood rather well compared to the
other warning groups. In general, the reaction generic stop symbol
warning seems to be optimal considering its generic use allows trig-
gering it even when the type of safety-critical object is not yet clearly
identiﬁable. However, such an extreme reaction as elicited by the RG
warning might surprise following traﬃc, since none of the usual cues to
anticipate such driving behavior like turning indications are present in
the case of a collision warning. Thus, the following drivers might not be
ready to intervene abruptly, which is why they might not react in time
and crash into the previously warned lead vehicle (see Baldock et al.,
2005; Muhrer and Vollrath, 2010; Najm et al., 1994). Moreover, drivers
could feel stressed and annoyed by a reaction demand deemed as too
intrusive regarding a situation of lower criticality. Therefore, a uni-
versal warning type does not seem feasible.
It should be considered to implement the ﬁndings of this study into
a multi-stage warning system, which displays a stop symbol as reaction-
oriented generic warning in very critical situations (at a late stage), but
a diﬀerent warning type in less critical situations (at an earlier stage) to
prevent them from becoming more critical (Werneke et al., 2014;
Winkler et al., 2016; Winkler et al., 2018a). As in less critical situations
drivers need to be more attentive and can take more time to react, an
attention-oriented warning might be useful. Choosing the generic ver-
sion of the attention-oriented warning strategy (exclamation mark
within warning triangle) might be preferred as in the less critical si-
tuations it leads to similar driver reactions than its speciﬁc counterpart,
but would allow the warning system more ﬂexibility as it can be used
for many diﬀerent use cases. Furthermore, generic warnings forgive
errors in object detection and can thus reduce the potential risk of false
alarms. Since multi-modal warnings might be even more eﬀective to
warn drivers (see Kramer et al., 2007), especially in very critical si-
tuations, a further modality could be implemented in a next research
step. For example, the stop symbol as reaction generic visual warning in
more critical situations or later warning stages (compared to less cri-
tical situations or earlier warning stages) could be accompanied by an
acoustic signal in order to alert drivers stronger to an increased urgency
of a situation. Besides, this could support drivers in diﬀerentiating
better between both warning stages and even activate distracted drivers
suﬃciently, which might be engaged in a secondary task and thus have
their gaze directed away from the road. In any case combining some of
the symbols in a multi-stage warning system should be further in-
vestigated, as well as the case of false alarms or imperfect warnings.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the German Federal Ministry for
Economic Aﬀairs and Energy [grant number 19S12009O] on the basis
of a decision by the German Bundestag and thus part of the project
initiative
“UR:BAN”
(acronym
for
“Urban
Space:
User-oriented
Assistance Systems and Network Management”, see www.urban-online.
org)
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
13

--- Page 14 ---
Appendix A
The post-hoc results of the multiple pairwise comparisons within the signiﬁcant factor scenario for the situation criticality, the brake reaction
time, brake maximum and the warning understandability can be found in Table A1 of Appendix A. Bonferroni-corrected p-values are reported.
References
Abe, G., Richardson, J., 2006. Alarm timing, trust and driver expectation for forward
collision warning systems. Applied Ergonomics 37, 577–586. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.apergo.2005.11.001.
Ablaßmeier, M., Poitschke, T., Wallhoﬀ, F., Bengler, K., Rigoll, G., 2007. Eye Gaze Studies
Comparing Head-up and Head-down Displays in Vehicles. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Multimedia and Expo. Beijing, China. pp. 2250–2252.
Adams, L.D., 1994. Review of the literature on obstacle avoidance maneuvers (Report No.
UMTRI-94-19).
Retrieved from. Transportation Research Institute, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA: University of Michigan. http://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/bitstream/handle/
2027.42/1068/86649.0001.001.pdf.
Alessandretti, G., Amditis, A., Metzner, S., Johannson, E., Fahrenkrog, F., 2014.
Deliverable D1.9 | Final Report of the project interactIVe (accident avoidance by
active intervention for Intelligent Vehicles).
Retrieved from. . http://www.
interactive-ip.eu/index.dhtml/docs/interactIVe_SP1_20140506v1.2-D19-Final_
Report.pdf.
Alves, P.R.J.A., Gonçalves, J., Rossetti, R.J.F., Oliveira, E.C., Olaverri-Monreal, C., 2013.
Forward Collision Warning Systems Using Heads-Up Displays: Testing Usability of
Two New Metaphors. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium.
Gold Coast City, Australia. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IVS.2013.6629438. pp.1-6.
Aust, M.L., Engström, J., Viström, M., 2013. Eﬀects of forward collision warning and
repeated event exposure on emergency braking. Transportation Research Part F:
Traﬃc Psychology and Behaviour 18, 34–46. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2012.
Table A1
Multiple pairwise comparison results for the signiﬁcant factor scenario (signiﬁcant p-values in bold).
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
14

--- Page 15 ---
12.010.
Azuma, R.T., 1997. A Survey of Augmented Reality. Presence 6 (4), 355–385. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1162/pres.1997.6.4.355.
Baldock, M.R.J., Long, A.D., Lindsay, V.L., Mclean, A.J., 2005. Rear-end crashes. CASR
Report Series – CASR 018.
Retrieved from. Centre for Automotive Safety Research,
University of Adelaide, Australia. http://casr.adelaide.edu.au/publications/
researchreports/CASR018.pdf.
Ben-Yaacov, A., Maltz, M., Shinar, D., 2002. Eﬀects of an in-vehicle collision avoidance
warning system on short- and long-term driving performance. Human Factors 44 (2),
335–342. http://dx.doi.org/10.1518/0018720024497925.
Bengler, K., Drüke, J., Hoﬀmann, S., Manstetten, D., Neukum, A., 2018. UR:BAN Human
Factors in Traﬃc. Approaches for Safe, Eﬃcient and Stress-free Urban Traﬃc.
Springer, Wiesbaden, Germany.
Benmimoun, A., Chen, J.C., Suzuki, T., 2007. Design and Practical Evaluation of an
Intersection Assistant in Real World Tests. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Intelligent
Vehicles Symposium. Istanbul, Turkey. pp. 606-611.
Bhatia, P., 2003. Vehicle technologies to improve performance and Safety (UCTC Report
No. 622).
Retrieved from. University of California Transportation Center, Berkeley,
CA, USA. http://escholarship.org/uc/item/4zw4m05k.
Biondi, F., Strayer, D.L., Rossi, R., Gastaldi, M., Mulatti, C., 2017. Advanced driver as-
sistance systems: using multimodal redundant warnings to enhance road safety.
Applied Ergonomics 58, 238–244. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2016.06.016.
Boda, C.-N., Dozza, M., Bohman, K., Thalya, P., Larsson, A., Lubbe, N., 2018. Modelling
how drivers respond to a bicyclist crossing their path at an intersection: How do test
track and driving simulator compare? Accident Analysis and Prevention 111,
238–250. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2017.11.032.
Borowsky, A., Oron-Gilad, T., 2013. Exploring the eﬀects of driving experience on hazard
awareness and risk perception via real-time hazard identiﬁcation, hazard classiﬁca-
tion, and rating tasks. Accident Analysis and Prevention 59, 548–565. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.aap.2013.07.008.
Borowsky, A., Oron-Gilad, T., Parmet, Y., 2009. Age and skill diﬀerences in classifying
hazardous traﬃc scenes. Transportation Research Part F: Traﬃc Psychology and
Behaviour 12 (4), 277–287. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2009.02.001.
Brown, J., Morgan, J.F., Campbell, J., Hoover, C., Jerome, C., 2017. Validations of
Integrated Driver Vehicle Interface (DVI) Conﬁgurations. Proceedings of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 61 (1), 1431–1435. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/1541931213601843.
Caird, J.K., Chisholm, S.L., Edwards, C.J., Creaser, J.I., 2007. The eﬀect of yellow light
onset time on older and younger drivers' perception response time (PRT) and inter-
section behavior. Transportation Research Part F: Traﬃc Psychology and Behaviour
10 (5), 383–396. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2007.03.002.
Campbell, J.L., Richard, C.M., Brown, J.L., McCallum, M., 2007. Crash Warning System
Interfaces: Human Factors Insights and Lessons Learned (Report No. DOT HS-810
697).
Retrieved from. National Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration (NHTSA),
Washington, DC, USA. https://www.nhtsa.gov/DOT/NHTSA/NRD/Multimedia/
PDFs/Crash%20Avoidance/2007/CWS_HF_Insights_Task_5_Final_Rpt.pdf.
Campbell, J.L., Richman, J.B., Carney, C., Lee, J.D., 2004. In-Vehicle Display Icons and
Other Information Elements. Volume I: Guidelines (Report No. FHWA-RD-03-065).
Retrieved from. Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), Georgetown Pike McLean,
VA, USA. http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/research/safety/03065/03065.
pdf.
Cao, Y., Mahr, A., Castronovo, S., Theune, M., Stahl, C., Müller, C.A., 2010. Local danger
warnings for drivers: the eﬀect of modality and level of assistance on driver reaction.
In: Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces
(IUI). Hong Kong, China. pp. 239–248. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1719970.
1720004.
Cicchino, J.B., 2017. Eﬀectiveness of forward collision warning and autonomous emer-
gency braking systems in reducing front-to-rear crash rates. Accident Analysis and
Prevention 99, 142–152. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2016.11.009.
Cordts, M., Rehfeld, T., Schneider, L., Pfeiﬀer, D., Enzweiler, M., Roth, S., Pollefeys, M.,
Franke, U., 2017. The Stixel World: A medium-level representation of traﬃc scenes.
Image and Vision Computing 68, 40–52.
Crundall, D., Chapman, P., Trawley, S., Collins, L., van Loon, E., Andrews, B., Underwood,
G., 2012. Some hazards are more attractive than others: Drivers of varying experience
respond diﬀerently to diﬀerent types of hazard. Accident Analysis and Prevention 45,
600–609. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2011.09.049.
Cummings, M.L., Kilgore, R.M., Wang, E., Tijerna, L., Kochhar, D.S., 2007. Eﬀects of
Single Versus Multiple Warnings on Driver Performance. Human Factors 49 (6),
1097–1106. http://dx.doi.org/10.1518/001872007X249956.
Diederichs, F., Marberger, C., Hinder, V., 2010. Iterative design and assessment of an
audio visual warning concept for Car2x communication systems. In: Proceedings of
the ITS World Congress on Intelligent Transportation Systems. Busan, Korea.
Diederichs, F., Brouwer, N., Klöden, H., Zahn, P., Schmitz, B., 2018. Application of a
Driver Intention Recognition Algorithm on a Pedestrian Intention Recognition and
Collision Avoidance System. In: Bengler, K., Drüke, J., Hoﬀmann, S., Manstetten, D.,
Neukum, A. (Eds.), UR:BAN Human Factors in Traﬃc. Approaches for Safe, Eﬃcient
and Stress-free Urban Traﬃc. Springer, Wiesbaden, Germany pp. 267-286.
Dirkin, G.R., 1983. Cognitive tunnelling-use of visual information under stress. Perceptual
and Motor Skills 56, 191–198.
Drüke, J., Semmler, C., Bendewald, L., 2018. The “HMI tool kit” as a Strategy for the
Systematic Derivation of User-Oriented HMI Concepts of Driver Assistance Systems in
Urban Areas. In: Bengler, K., Drüke, J., Hoﬀmann, S., Manstetten, D., Neukum, A.
(Eds.), UR:BAN Human Factors in Traﬃc. Approaches for Safe, Eﬃcient and Stress-
free Urban Traﬃc. Springer, Wiesbaden, Germany. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-658-15418-9_4. pp. 53-74.
Ergoneers, 2009. Dikablis eye tracking system. Ergoneers, Manching, Germany.
Fricke, N., Griesche, S., Schieben, A., Hesse, T., Baumann, M., 2015. Driver behavior
following an automatic steering intervention. Accident Analysis and Prevention 83,
190–196. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2015.07.018.
George, P., Thouvenin, I., Frémont, V., Cherfaoui, V., 2012. DAARIA: Driver assistance by
augmented reality for intelligent automobile. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Intelligent
Vehicles Symposium. Alcala de Henares, Spain. pp. 1043–1048.
Gish, K.W., Staplin, L., 1995. Human Factors Aspects of Using Head Up Displays in
Automobiles: A Review of the Literature (Report No. DOT HS 808 320).
Retrieved
from. National Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration (NHTSA), Washington, DC,
USA. www.mvs.net/pdf/Human_Factors_of_HUDs.pdf.
Great Britain Department for Transport, 2015. Reported Road Casualties Great Britain:
2014 Annual Report. Retrieved from. . https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/
reported-road-casualties-great-britain-annual-report-2014.
Green, P., Sullivan, J., Tsimhoni, O., Oberholtzer, J., Buonarosa, M.L., Devonshire, J.,
Schweitzer, J., Baragar, E., Sayer, J., 2008. Integrated Vehicle-Based Safety Systems
(IVBSS) - Human Factors and Driver-Vehicle Interface (DVI) (Report No. DOT HS 810
905).
Retrieved from. National Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration (NHTSA),
Washington, DC, USA. https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/
ViewPublication/811059.
Hanowski, R.J., Dingus, T.A., Gallagher, J.P., Kieliszewski, C.A., Neale, V.L., 1999. Driver
response to in-vehicle warnings. Transportation Human Factors 1 (1), 91–106.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/sthf0101_10.
Heller, O., 1982. Theorie und Praxis des Verfahrens der Kategorienunterteilung (KU). In:
Heller, O. (Ed.), Forschungsbericht 1981. Psychologisches Institut der Universität
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany pp. 1-15.
Hesse, T., Engström, J., Johansson, E., Veralda, G., Brockmann, M., Rambaldini, A.,
Fricke, N., Flemisch, F., Köster, F., Kanstrup, L., 2011. Towards User-Centred
Development of Integrated Information, Warning, and Intervention Strategies for
Multiple ADAS in the EU Project interactive. In: Stephanidis, C. (Ed.), Universal
Access in Human-Computer-Interaction. Design for All and eInclusion. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany pp. 280–289.
Ho, C., Spence, C., 2008. The multisensory driver: Implications for ergonomic car inter-
face design. Human factors in road and rail transport. Ashgate, Aldershot, England &
Burlington, VT, USA.
Hofauer, S., Michel, B., Weise, S., Karmann, A.J., Diermeyer, F., Stephan, A., Drüke, J.,
Semmler, C., Bendewald, L., 2018. HMI Strategy – Lateral and Longitudinal Control.
In: Bengler, K., Drüke, J., Hoﬀmann, S., Manstetten, D., Neukum, A. (Eds.), UR:BAN
Human Factors in Traﬃc. Approaches for Safe, Eﬃcient and Stress-free Urban Traﬃc.
Springer, Wiesbaden, Germany. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-15418-9_6.
pp. 105–118.
Horowitz, A.D., Dingus, T.A., 1992. Warning signal design: a key human factors issue in
an in-vehicle front-to-rear-end collision warning system. Proceedings of the Human
Factors Society Annual Meeting. Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, Santa
Monica, CA, USA pp. 1011-1013.
Horrey, W.J., Wickens, C.D., Alexander, A.L., 2003. The eﬀects of head-up display clutter
and in-vehicle display separation on concurrent driving performance. Proceedings of
the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting 47 (16), 1880–1884.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/154193120304701610.
ISO, 2005. Road vehicles – Ergonomic aspects of in-vehicle presentation for transport
information and control systems – warnings (Technical Report No. ISO/TR 16352).
ISO, Geneva, Switzerland.
Jones, E.M., Hansman, R.J., 2007. Approaches to Enhance Driver Situational Assessment
Aids (Report No. ICAT-2007-3).
Retrieved from. . http://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/
38869.
Kazazi, J., Winkler, S., Vollrath, M., 2016. The inﬂuence of attention allocation and age
on intersection accidents. Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour
43, 1–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2016.09.010.
Kiefer, R., LeBlanc, D., Palmer, M., Salinger, J., Deering, R., Shulman, M., 1999.
Development and validation of functional deﬁnitions and evaluation procedures for
collision warning/avoidance systems (Report No. DTNH22-95-H-07301).
Retrieved
from. National Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration (NHTSA), Washington, DC,
USA. http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/jpodocs/repts_te/87l01!.pdf.
Klein, R.M., Kingstone, A., Pontefract, A., 1992. Orienting of visual attention. In: Rayner,
K. (Ed.), Eye movements and visual cognition: Scene perception and reading.
Springer-Verlag, New York pp. 46–65.
Koustanaï, A., Cavallo, V., Delhomme, P., Mas, A., 2012. Simulator Training With a
Forward Collision Warning System: Eﬀects on Driver-System Interactions and Driver
Trust. Human Factors 54 (5), 709–721. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
0018720812441796.
Kramer, A.F., Cassavaugh, N., Horrey, W.J., Becic, E., Mayhugh, J.L., 2007. Inﬂuence of
Age and Proximity Warning Devices on Collision Avoidance in Simulated Driving.
Human Factors 49 (5), 935–949. http://dx.doi.org/10.1518/001872007X230271.
Krüger, H.-P., Grein, M., Kaussner, A., Mark, C., 2005. SILAB – A task-oriented driving
simulation. In: Proceedings of the Driving Simulator Conference. Iowa City, IA, USA.
pp. 232-331.
Laughery, K.R., 2006. Safety communications: Warnings. Applied Ergonomics 37 (4),
467–478. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2006.04.020.
Laughery, K.R., Wogalter, M.S., 2006. Designing Eﬀective Warnings. Reviews of Human
Factors and Ergonomics 2 (1), 241–271. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
1557234X0600200109.
Lee, J.D., Gore, B.F., Campbell, J.L., 1999. Display Alternatives for In-Vehicle Warning
and Sign Information: Message Style, Location and Modality. Transportation Human
Factors 1 (4), 347–375. http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/sthf0104_6.
Lee, J.D., Hoﬀman, J.D., Brown, T.L., McGehee, D.V., 2002a. Comparison of Driver
Braking Responses in a High Fidelity Driving Simulator and on a Test Track.
Transportation Research Record 1803 (1), 59–65. http://dx.doi.org/10.3141/
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
15

--- Page 16 ---
1803-09.
Lee, J.D., McGehee, D.V., Brown, T.L., Reyes, M.L., 2002b. Collision warning timing,
driver distraction, and driver response to imminent rear-end collisions in a high-
ﬁdelity driving simulator. Human Factors 44 (2), 314–334. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1518/0018720024497844.
Lerner, N., Dekker, D., Steinberg, G., Huey, R., 1996a. Inappropriate alarm rates and
driver annoyance (Report No. DTNH22-91-C-07004).
Retrieved from. National
Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration (NHTSA), Washington, DC, USA. http://ntl.
bts.gov/lib/jpodocs/repts_te/3757.pdf.
Lerner, N., Kotwal, B., Lyons, R., Gardner-Bonneau, D., 1996b. Preliminary human factors
guidelines for crash avoidance warning devices (Report No. DTNH22-91-C-07004).
Retrieved from. National Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration (NHTSA),
Washington, DC, USA. http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/jpodocs/repts_te/5583.pdf.
Liu, Y.-C., Schreiner, C.S., Dingus, T.A., 1999. Development of Human Factors Guidelines
for Advanced Traveler Information Systems (ATIS) and Commercial Vehicle
Operations (CVO): Human Factors Evaluation of the Eﬀectiveness of Multi-Modality
Displays in Advanced Traveler Information Systems (Report No. FHWA-RD-96-150).
Retrieved from. Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), Georgetown Pike McLean,
VA, USA. https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/publications/research/safety/96150/96150.
pdf.
Luoma, J., Rämä, P., 2002. Acceptance of traﬃc sign information provided by an in-
vehicle terminal. 2002 ITS World Congress on Intelligent Transport Systems.
Retrieved from. virtual.vtt.ﬁ/ﬁts/impacts/Luoma_VTT.pdf.
Maag, C., Schneider, N., Lübbeke, T., Weisswange, T.H., Goerick, C., 2015. Car Gestures –
Advisory warning using additional steering wheel angles. Accident Analysis and
Prevention 83, 143–153. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2015.07.020.
Mackworth, N.H., 1965. Visual noise causes tunnel vision. Psychonomic Science 3 (2),
67–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03343023.
Malaterre, G., Ferrandez, F., Fleury, D., Lechner, D., 1988. Decision making in emergency
situations. Ergonomics 31 (4), 643–655.
Malone, S., Brünken, R., 2016. The role of ecological validity in hazard perception as-
sessment. Transportation Research Part F: Psychology and Behaviour 40, 91–103.
Marshall, D.C., Lee, J.D., Austria, P.A., 2007. Alerts for in-vehicle information systems:
annoyance, urgency, and appropriateness. Hum. Factors 49 (1), 145–157. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1518/001872007779598145.
Moeller, B., Frings, C., 2014. Designers beware: Response retrieval eﬀects inﬂuence dri-
vers' response times to local danger warnings. Transportation Research Part F: Traﬃc
Psychology and Behaviour 24, 117–132. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2014.04.
013.
Muhrer, E., Reinprecht, K., Vollrath, M., 2012. Driving With a Partially Autonomous
Forward Collision Warning System: How Do Drivers React? Human Factors 54 (5),
698–708. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0018720812439712.
Muhrer, E., Vollrath, M., 2010. Expectations while car following – The consequences for
driving behaviour in a simulated driving task. Accident Analysis and Prevention 42,
2158–2164. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2010.07.009.
Najm, W.G., Koziol, J.S., Tijerina, L., Pierowicz, J.A., Hendricks, D.L., 1994. Comparative
Assessment of Crash Causal Factors and IVHS Countermeasures. In: Washington D.C.,
USA: IVHS America. Proceedings of the IVHS America Annual Meeting, vol. 1 pp.
412-421.
National Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration, 2008. National Motor Vehicle Crash
Causation Survey: Report to Congress (Report No. DOT HS 811 059).
Retrieved
from. National Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration (NHTSA), Washington, DC,
USA. https://crashstats.nhtsa.dot.gov/Api/Public/ViewPublication/811059.
Naujoks, F., Neukum, A., 2014. Timing of in-vehicle advisory warnings based on co-
operative perception. In: de Waard, D., Brookhuis, K., Wiczorek, R., di Nocera, F.,
Brouwer, R., Barham, P., Weikert, C., Kluge, A., Gerbino, W., Toﬀetti, A. (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Europe Chapter Annual
Meeting, (pp. 193-206). Retrieved from. http://www.hfes-europe.org/wp-content/
uploads/2014/06/Naujoks.pdf.
Naujoks, F., Totzke, I., 2014. Behavioral adaptation caused by predictive warning systems
– The case of congestion tail warnings. Transsportation Research Part F: Traﬃc
Psychology and Behaviour 26, 49–61. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2014.06.010.
Naujoks, F., Kiesel, A., Neukum, A., 2016. Cooperative warning systems: The impact of
false and unnecessary alarms on drivers' compliance. Accident Analysis and
Prevention 97, 162–175. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2016.09.009.
New Zealand Transport Agency, 2014. Motor Vehicle Crashes in New Zealand 2013.
Yearly Report 2014.
Retrieved from. . http://www.transport.govt.nz/assets/
Uploads/Research/Documents/Motor-Vehicle-Crashes-2013/Motor-vehicle-crashes-
in-New-Zealand-2013.pdf.
Ng, A.W.Y., Chan, A.H.S., 2008. The eﬀects of driver factors and sign design features on
the comprehensibility of traﬃc signs. Journal of Safety Research 39, 321–328. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsr.2008.02.031.
Payre, W., Diels, C., 2018. Human-Machine Interface Design Development for Connected
and Cooperative Vehicle Features. In: In: Stanton, N.A. (Ed.), Advances in Human
Aspects of Transportation, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, vol. 597
Springer, Cham, Switzerland. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-60441-1_41. pp.
415-422.
Piersma, D., 2018. Fitness to drive of older drivers with cognitive impairments. SWOV-
Dissertatiereeks, Den Haag, The Netherlands.
Plavsic, M., Bubb, H., Duschl, M., Tönnis, M., Klinker, G., 2009. Ergonomic Design and
Evaluation of Augmented Reality Based Cautionary Warnings for Driving Assistance
in Urban Environments. In: Proceedings of the World Congress on Ergonomics
(International Ergonomics Association, IEA). Beijing, China. Retrieved from. http://
campar.in.tum.de/pub/plavsic2009iea/plavsic2009iea.pdf.
Powelleit, M., Vollrath, M., 2018. Situational inﬂuences on response time and maneuver
choice: Development of time-critical scenarios. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Powelleit, M., Vollrath, M., 2013. Konzept zur Bewertung der Nutzbarkeit modalitäts-
speziﬁscher Warnsignale in zeitkritischen Fahrsituationen (Usability evaluation
concept for modality-speciﬁc warning signals in time-critical driving situations)
(Report No. FE 82.0583/2013). Bundesanstalt für Straßenwesen (BASt), Bergisch
Gladbach, Germany.
Pradhan, A.K., Pollatsek, A., Knodler, M., Fisher, D.L., 2009. Can younger drivers be
trained to scan for information that will reduce their risk in roadway traﬃc scenarios
that are hard to identify as hazardous? Ergonomics 52, 657–673. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/00140130802550232.
Rackoﬀ, N., 1974. An investigation of age related changes in driver’s visual search pat-
terns and driving performance and the relation to tests of basic functional capacities
(Doctoral thesis. The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
Rittger, L., Götze, M., 2018. HMI Strategy – Recommended Action. In: Bengler, K., Drüke,
J., Hoﬀmann, S., Manstetten, D., Neukum, A. (Eds.), UR:BAN Human Factors in
Traﬃc. Approaches for Safe, Eﬃcient and Stress-free Urban Traﬃc. Springer,
Wiesbaden, Germany. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-15418-9_6. pp.
119–150.
Rockwell, T., 1972. Skills, Judgment and Information Acquisition in Driving. In: Forbes,
T.W. (Ed.), Human Factors in Highway Traﬃc Safety Research. John Wiley & Sons.
Sanders, A.F., 1970. Some aspects of the selective process in the functional visual ﬁeld.
Ergonomics 13 (1), 101–117. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00140137008931124.
Schlag, B., 1993. Elderly drivers in Germany ﬁtness and driving behavior. Accident
Analysis and Prevention 25 (1), 47–55. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0001-4575(93)
90095-E.
Schmidt, S., Färber, B., 2009. Pedestrians at the kerb – Recognising the action intentions
of humans. Transportation Research Part F: Traﬃc Psychology and Behaviour 12,
300–310. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2009.02.003.
Schneider, N., Purucker, C., Neukum, A., 2015. Comparison of steering interventions in
time-critical scenarios. Procedia Manufacturing 3, 3107–3114. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.promfg.2015.07.858.
Scott, J.J., Gray, R., 2008. A Comparison of Tactile, Visual, and Auditory Warnings for
Rear-End Collision Prevention in Simulated Driving. Human Factors 50 (2), 264–275.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1518/001872008X250674.
Schwarz, F., Fastenmeier, W., 2017. Augmented reality warnings in vehicles: Eﬀects of
modality and speciﬁcity on eﬀectiveness. Accident Analysis and Prevention 101,
55–66. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2017.01.019.
Shinar, D., Schechtman, E., 2002. Headway feedback improves intervehicular distance:
Aﬁeld study. Human Factors 44, 474–481. http://dx.doi.org/10.1518/
0018720024497682.
Singh, S., 2015. Critical reasons for crashes investigated in the National Motor Vehicle
Crash Causation Survey. (Traﬃc Safety Facts Crash Stats. Report No. DOT HS 812
115). National Highway Traﬃc Safety Administration, Washington, DC.
Spence, C.J., Driver, J., 1994. Covert spatial orienting in audition: Exogenous and en-
dogenous mechanisms. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance 20 (3), 555–574. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0096-1523.20.3.555.
Statistisches Bundesamt, 2014. Traﬃc. Traﬃc accidents 2013 [Verkehr. Verkehrsunfälle
2013]. Annual Report. Fachserie 8, Reihe 7. (Report No. 2080700137004).
Retrieved from. Statistisches Bundesamt, Wiesbaden, Germany. https://www.
destatis.de/DE/Publikationen/Thematisch/TransportVerkehr/Verkehrsunfaelle/
VerkehrsunfaelleJ2080700137004.pdf?__blob=publicationFile.
Summala, H., 1996. Accident risk and driver behaviour. Safety Science 22, 103–117.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0925-7535(96)00009-4.
Tan, H.-S., Huang, J., 2006. DGPS-Based Vehicle-to-Vehicle Cooperative Collision
Warning: Engineering Feasibility Viewpoints. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems 7 (4), 415–428. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2006.
883938.
Thoma, S., Lindberg, T., Klinker, G., 2009. Evaluation of a generic warning for multiple
intersection assistance systems. In: de Waard, D., Godthelp, J., Kooi, F.L., Brookhuis,
K.A. (Eds.), Human Factors, Security and Safety. Shaker Publishing, Maastricht, the
Netherlands pp. 173-188.
Tretten, P., Gärling, A., Nilsson, R., Larsson, T.C., 2011. An On-Road Study of Head-Up
Display: Preferred Location and Acceptance Levels. Proceedings of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 55 (1), 1914–1918. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1177/1071181311551398.
Tsimhoni, O., Green, P., Watanabe, H., 2001. Detecting and Reading Text on HUDs:
Eﬀects of Driving Workload and Message Location. In: Proceedings of the Intelligent
Transportation Society (ITS) of America Annual Meeting and Exposition. Washington,
DC, USA.
van der Horst, R., 2004. Occlusion as a measure for visual workload: an overview of TNO
occlusion research in car driving. Appl. Ergon. 35, 189–196. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.apergo.2003.11.010.
van Driel, C.J.G., Hoedemaeker, M., van Arem, B., 2007. Impacts of a congestion assistant
on driving behaviour and acceptance using a driving simulator. Transportation
Research Part F: Traﬃc Psychology and Behaviour 10, 139–152. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.trf.2006.08.003.
Ward, N.J., Parkes, A., 1994. Head-up displays and their automotive application: an
overview of human factors issues aﬀecting safety. Accident Analysis and Prevention
26 (6), 703–717. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0001-4575(94)90049-3.
Watanabe, H., Yoo, H., Tsimhoni, O., Green, P., 1999. The Eﬀect of HUD Warning
Location on Driver Responses. In: Proceedings of the World Congress on Intelligent
Transport Systems. Toronto, Canada.
Werneke, J., Kleen, A., Vollrath, M., 2014. Perfect timing: Urgency, not driving situations,
inﬂuence the best timing to activate warnings. Human Factors 56 (2), 249–259.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0018720813490728.
Werneke, J., Vollrath, M., 2012. What does the driver look at? The inﬂuence of inter-
section characteristics on attention allocation and driving behavior. Accident
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
16

--- Page 17 ---
Analysis and Prevention 45, 610–619. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2011.09.048.
Werneke, J., Vollrath, M., 2013. How to present collision warnings at intersections? – A
comparison of diﬀerent approaches. Accident Analysis and Prevention 52, 91–99.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2012.12.001.
Wickens, C.D., Long, Lt. J., 1994. Conformal symbology, attention shifts, and the head-up
display. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting,
vol. 38 (1), 6–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/154193129403800103.
Williams, L.J., 1985. Tunnel vision induced by foveal load manipulation. Human Factors
27 (2), 221–227. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/001872088502700209.
Winkler, S., Kazazi, J., Vollrath, M., 2015. Distractive or supportive – how warnings in the
head-up display aﬀect drivers’ gaze and driving behaviour. Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems 1035–1040. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1109/ITSC.2015.172.
Winkler, S., Werneke, J., Vollrath, M., 2016. Timing of early warning stages in a multi
stage collision warning system: Drivers' evaluation depending on situational inﬂu-
ences. Transportation Research Part F 36, 57–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.
2015.11.001.
Winkler, S., Kazazi, J., Vollrath, M., 2018a. Practice makes better – Learning eﬀects of
driving with a multi-stage collision warning. Accident Analysis and Prevention.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2018.01.018.
Winkler, S., Powelleit, M., Kazazi, J., Vollrath, M., Krautter, W., Korthauer, A., Drüke, J.,
Töpfer, D., Semmler, C., Bendewald, L., 2018b. HMI strategy – Warnings and inter-
ventions. In: Bengler, K., Drüke, J., Hoﬀmann, S., Manstetten, D., Neukum, A. (Eds.),
UR:BAN Human Factors in Traﬃc. Approaches for Safe, Eﬃcient and Stress-free
Urban Traﬃc. Springer, Wiesbaden, Germany. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
658-15418-9_5. pp. 75-103.
Wittmann, M., Kiss, M., Gugg, P., Steﬀen, A., Fink, M., Pöppel, E., Kamiya, H., 2006.
Eﬀects of display position of a visual in-vehicle task on simulated driving. Applied
Ergonomics 37, 187–199. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2005.06.002.
Wogalter, M.S., Conzola, V.C., Smith-Jackson, T.L., 2002. Research-based guidelines for
warning design and evaluation. Applied Ergonomics 33, 219–230. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/S0003-6870(02)00009-1.
Wolﬀsohn, J.S., McBrien, N.A., Edgar, G.K., Stout, T., 1998. The inﬂuence of cognition
and age on accommodation, detection rate and response times when using a car head-
up display (HUD). Ophthalmic & Physiological Optics 18 (3), 243–253. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S0275-5408(97)00094-X.
Xiang, W., Yan, X., Weng, J., Li, X., 2016. Eﬀect of auditory in-vehicle warning in-
formation on drivers' brake response time to red-light running vehicles during col-
lision avoidance. Transportation Research Part F 40, 56–67. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.trf.2015.12.002.
Yan, X., Radwan, E., Guo, D., 2007. Eﬀects of major-road vehicle speed and driver age
and gender on left turn gap acceptance. Accident Analysis and Prevention 39 (4),
843–852. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2006.12.006.
Yoo, H., Tsimhoni, O., Watanabe, H., Green, P., Shah, R., 1999. Display of HUD Warnings
to Drivers: Determining an Optimal Location (Report No. UMTRI-99-5). University of
Michigan, Transportation Research Institute, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
Young, S.L., 1991. Increasing the noticeability of warnings, eﬀects of pictorial color,
signal, icon and border. In: Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 36th Annual
Meeting. Human Factors Society. Santa Monica, CA. pp. 580–584.
Zarife, R., 2014. Integrative Warning Concept for Multiple Driver Assistance Systems
(Doctoral thesis, Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany).
Retrieved from. https://opus.bibliothek.uni-wuerzburg.de/ﬁles/10111/Diss_Zarife_
Rami.pdf.
S. Winkler et al.
Accident Analysis and Prevention xxx (xxxx) xxx–xxx
17
