--- Page 1 ---
Applied Ergonomics 37 (2006) 577–586
Alarm timing, trust and driver expectation for forward collision
warning systems
Genya Abea,, John Richardsonb
aJapan Automobile Research Institute, Karima 2530, Tsukuba 305-0822, Japan
bErgonomics and Safety Research Institute, Loughborough University, Holywell Park, Loughborough LE11 3UZ, UK
Received 18 April 2005; received in revised form 5 September 2005; accepted 2 November 2005
Abstract
In order to improve road safety, automobile manufacturers are now developing Forward Collision Warning Systems (FCWS).
However, there has been insufﬁcient consideration of how drivers may respond to FCWS. This driving simulator study focused on alarm
timing and its impact on driver response to alarm. The experimental investigation considered driver perception of alarm timings and its
inﬂuence on trust at three driving speeds (40, 60 and 70 mile/h) and two time headways (1.7 and 2.2 s). The results showed that alarm
effectiveness varied in response to driving conditions. Alarm promptness had a greater inﬂuence on ratings of trust than improvements in
braking performance enabled by the alarm system. Moreover, alarms which were presented after braking actions had been initiated were
viewed as late alarms. It is concluded that drivers typically expect alarms to be presented before they initiate braking actions and when
this does not happen driver trust in the system is substantially decreased.
r 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Alarm timing; Driving; Trust
1. Introduction
As a result of increasing intolerance it is now widely
recognised that road accidents are a social problem that
require a signiﬁcant reduction throughout the world.
Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) have been
developed in order to improve road safety and increase
driver comfort and, as a part of that technical develop-
ment,
automobile
manufacturers
are
now
producing
Forward Collision Warning Systems (FCWS). It has been
assumed that FCWS will be of great beneﬁt to drivers who
fail to pay sufﬁcient attention to the road ahead, resulting
in decreased numbers of accidents (Alm and Nilsson, 2000;
Ben-Yaacov et al., 2002). On the other hand, however, it
has been argued that optimistic predictions of the promised
beneﬁts of technically advanced systems have not taken
adequate consideration of human factors which may
limit system performance (Kantowitz, 2000; Hancock
and Verwey, 1997). Lee and Kantowitz (1998) note that
system utility depends not only on the intelligence of the
technology but also on the joint performance of FCWS and
drivers.
The criteria that determine alarm activation are a critical
issue in alarm system design and they are a common
human factors discussion topic in FCWS (Janssen and
Nilsson, 1993; Hancock and Parasuraman, 1992). As
phenomena, rear-end collisions are highly time critical
and it is generally assumed that early alarms have the
greatest potential to prevent drivers from involvement in
collision accidents by giving them more time to respond to
imminent collision situations. Lee et al. (2002) found that
early alarms led to quicker braking responses by drivers
compared with unassisted driving. However, it has been
argued that warnings issued at a very early stage in
potential collision situations are frequently viewed as false
alarms (Janssen et al., 1993; Parasuraman et al., 1997) and
these alarms typically have a negative impact on total
system performance (Dingus et al., 1998). Bliss and Acton
(2003) showed that driver response to alarm systems varied
in response to differences in alarm reliability. On the other
hand, presenting alarms later may reduce the chances of
ARTICLE IN PRESS
www.elsevier.com/locate/apergo
0003-6870/$ - see front matter r 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.apergo.2005.11.001
Corresponding author. Tel.: +81 29 8560874; fax: +81 29 8561121.
E-mail address: agenya@jari.or.jp (G. Abe).

--- Page 2 ---
drivers having time to take appropriate action. There is no
easy way to overcome the dilemma and it is necessary to
accumulate research evidence on how drivers respond to
alarms in various driving conditions in order to establish
the design of optimum alarm timings.
It is well known that the operator’s trust in automated
systems plays an important role in determining their
interactions with such systems (Lee and Moray, 1992;
Muir, 1994; Muir and Moray, 1996; Satchell, 1998) and, in
particular, operator trust is strongly linked to reliance on
automated systems and patterns of system usage (Para-
suraman and Riley, 1997). Lee and Kantowitz (1998) note
that trust is one of the most important driver cognitive
characteristics which determines the appropriate use of
driver support systems. If drivers distrust FCWS, then, in
extreme cases, drivers may ignore alarms which are
presented from such systems. Hence, driver trust in FCWS
requires investigation in order to achieve appropriate
levels of cooperation between driver assistance system
and driver.
With respect to FCWS, it has been established that the
alarm
timing
may
inﬂuence
driver
trust.
Abe
and
Richardson (2004) found that trust in early alarms was
higher than that with late alarms under ﬁxed driving
conditions. However, Lee and Kantowitz (1998) insist that
the design characteristics of ADAS should be considered
from three points of view; driver characteristics, system
capabilities and environmental factors. This suggests that
the relationship between alarm timing and trust may be
inﬂuenced by environmental factors such as driving speed
and time headway. In fact, Green (2000) showed that the
level of driving demand resulting from driving speed, time
headway, etc. led to variation in braking response. Hence,
it is necessary to consider alarm timing and its relation to
driver trust in response to various driving conditions to
fully understand their inter-relationship.
However, alarm timing not only represents a system
capability it also exerts an inﬂuence on driver expectation
and acceptance of FCWS as a support system. Reichart
(1993) notes that the behaviour of ADAS has to be
consistent with driver expectation and that a conﬂict
between alarm timing and driver expectation may lead to a
reduction in driver trust. This is because alarm timings are
viewed as an output which represents system behaviour by
drivers. Furthermore, a deﬁning characteristic of FCWS is
that they are support systems which have the potential to
save drivers in critical situations rather than simply
increase driving comfort. Therefore, lack of consistency
may seriously decrease system utility and driver expecta-
tion should be incorporated into the design of alarm
timing. However, there has been little investigation of
driver expectation regarding alarm timing and its relation
to trust.
The aims of this study were therefore to understand how
variation in alarm timing might inﬂuence driver behaviour
and trust under different driving conditions (three driving
speeds and two time headways) and to investigate driver
expectations of alarm timing for FCWS and the relation-
ship of this to driver trust.
2. Method
2.1. Apparatus
The research was undertaken using the Leeds Advanced
Driving Simulator (2004), which uses complex computer
graphics to provide a highly realistic driving environment.
The simulated horizontal forward ﬁeld of view was 2301
and the vertical ﬁeld of view was 391. A rear view (601 in
the horizontal plane) was back projected onto a screen
behind the car to provide an image that could be seen
through the vehicle’s rear view and wing mirrors. The car
used in this study was a Rover 216GTi four-door sedan
modiﬁed for use in the simulator. Although the simulator
had a ﬁxed base, physical and functional ﬁdelity were
reasonably high and drivers were provided with realistic
driving conditions. Drivers received visual and haptic
feedback regarding vehicle control from the steering wheel,
brakes, accelerator, and gearshift controls in exactly the
same way as in a real car. Moreover, computer-generated
visual and auditory stimuli accurately represented environ-
mental changes resulting from driver actions. The simu-
lated driving environment was created using Multi-Gen
Creator software. In this study, a simulated rural road
environment was created with a single carriageway, a
leading vehicle and the occasional appearance of oncoming
vehicles.
The following vehicle, ‘driven’ by the subjects, was
equipped with a simulated FCWS. Although several
algorithms have been used for alarm trigger logics, a
Stop-Distance-Algorithm (SDA) was used in this experi-
ment (Wilson et al., 1997). The SDA is so termed because a
warning distance is deﬁned based on the difference between
the stopping distances of the leading and following vehicle.
This algorithm has three free parameters: reaction time
(RT),
deceleration
of
the
leading
vehicle
(Dl)
and
deceleration of the following vehicle (Df). RT is the
assumed reaction time of the driver of the following vehicle
and Dl and Df are the assumed decelerations of the leading
and following vehicle, respectively. A warning distance
(Dw) is found on the basis of these parameters along with
velocities of the leading (V l) and following (V f) vehicle as
follows:
Dw ¼ VfRT þ V2
f
2Df
 V 2
l
2Dl
.
(1)
In this study, two different timing characteristics of the
alarm timing (late/early) were prepared by manipulating Df
(0.60 g for late, 0.45 g for early). The other parameters had
the same value in all conditions (RT ¼ 1:25 s, Dl ¼ 0:5 g).
These parameters were chosen by considering two issues.
The ﬁrst was correspondence with ‘real-world’ values; the
values are representative of those that would be experi-
enced in on-road driving and should therefore appear
ARTICLE IN PRESS
G. Abe, J. Richardson / Applied Ergonomics 37 (2006) 577–586
578

--- Page 3 ---
appropriate to the participants. The second was the relative
difference in perceived alarm promptness between the
alarm timings. It was important that the participants
perceived clear differences between the parameter values
used. The warning system provided drivers with a simple
auditory alarm which lasted approximately 2.0 s and the
prominent frequency of the tone was 4000 Hz.
2.2. Subjects and experimental design
Twenty-two participants, ranging in age from 23 to 61
years (M ¼ 31:9, SD ¼ 9:3), took part in the experiment.
All were licensed drivers with driving experience of 2 years
or more. Each received a payment of £10 for their
participation.
The subjects were randomly and evenly assigned to each
of the early and late alarm timing conditions. Each
condition comprised two sessions; a session without alarms
and a session with alarms. Each session included six
potential collision events in which the leading vehicle
decelerated at a rate of 0.8 g, with the brake lights
illuminated, until it came to a stop. Three different driving
speeds (40, 60, 70 mile/h) and two different time headways
(1.7 and 2.2 s) were implemented as driving conditions. In
combination, these gave 6 treatment conditions (1.7 s/
40 mile/h; 2.2 s/40 mile/h; 1.7 s/60 mile/h; 2.2 s/60 mile/h;
1.7 s/70 mile/h; 2.2 s/70 mile/h). The order of driving con-
ditions was counterbalanced (Fig. 1) and the order of trials
within each session was also counterbalanced across the
subjects. The braking events were presented with an
irregular time interval to prevent drivers from predicting
their occurrence.
In situations where a collision event was engineered, one
of the driving conditions discussed above applied. The
required conditions were achieved by (1) ensuring that
subjects drove at the target speed with a tolerance of 75%
and (2) by adjusting the speed of the leading vehicle to
provide the correct headway. The time headway between
the leading and following vehicle was ﬁxed by manipulat-
ing the leading vehicle’s speed in response to the following
vehicle’s speed. Accordingly the distance headway was
determined by the experimental conditions that applied, i.e.
the target speed (75%) and the time headway before the
occurrence of a potential collision event.
2.3. Procedure
All participants were required to conﬁrm their informed
consent and were then briefed on task requirements by the
experimenter. Each participant was given a 10-min practice
drive to familiarise themselves with the simulator and to
experience the lead vehicle decelerations that would be
involved in the experimental trials. After a 5-min break, the
experimental trials were started. All participants were given
two objectives in these trials. One was to keep their own
speed to the target speed as directed by the experimenter
(40, 60 or 70 mile/h) and the other was to follow the leading
vehicle but to avoid rear-end collisions. The drivers
were directed to only use the brakes to avoid a collision
with the lead vehicle, rather than to change lanes. About 8 s
after each braking event, the leading vehicle gradually
began to move forward again and the subjects were
instructed to gradually accelerate until they reached the
target speed. The participants had a 5-min break between
sessions.
2.4. Dependent measures
Three dependent measures describing the driver’s brak-
ing response and two dependent measures describing driver
trust in the system and perception of alarm timing were
recorded:
(i) Braking event to brake onset time: This is the time
period between the braking event and application of
the brakes. This transition time represents the time
period between the occurrence of a critical event and
the driver’s ﬁnal action, i.e. implementation of the
brakes. The following two dependent variables (ii) and
(iii) represent sub-components of braking reaction
time.
(ii) Braking event to accelerator release time: This is the
time period between the braking event and the driver’s
release of the accelerator.
(iii) Accelerator release to brake onset time: This corre-
sponds to the time between the driver’s release of the
accelerator and application of the brakes.
(iv) Driver subjective rating of trust: A 10-point rating scale
was used to record the driver’s subjective estimation
of trust; 1 indicating ‘‘not at all’’ and 10 indicating
‘‘completely’’. After each braking event, the partici-
pants gave a verbal judgement of their trust in
ARTICLE IN PRESS
A Session without alarms
40mph
1.7s
2.2s
2.2s
2.2s
60mph
70mph
70mph
40mph
60mph
1.7s
1.7s
40mph
1.7s
2.2s
2.2s
2.2s
60mph
70mph
70mph
40mph
60mph
1.7s
1.7s
Order was counterbalanced
A session with alarm :
early or late alarms were provided
according to experimental 
conditions
Session order was counterbalanced
Order was counterbalanced
Fig. 1. Driving conditions for each session.
G. Abe, J. Richardson / Applied Ergonomics 37 (2006) 577–586
579

--- Page 4 ---
response to the following question; How much do you
trust the warning system?
(v) Driver subjective perception of alarm timing: Driver
perception of alarm timing was reported by using a
simple three-level estimation; ‘early’, ‘correct’, or ‘late’.
All subjects gave a verbal judgement of their percep-
tion of alarm timing in response to the following
question; How would you rate the alarm timing?
3. Results and discussion
In the subsequent statistical analyses an ANOVA was
used in order to investigate differences between factors,
however, several nonparametric tests were used in response
to experimental conditions when homogeneity of variance
was
not
present.
None
of
the
participants
suffered
collisions and so the effect of collision events on driver
behaviour could be ignored.
Two
different
alarm
timings
(relatively
early
and
relatively late) were achieved by manipulating the alarm
trigger parameters. In the following analysis of driver
behaviour, alarm time (i.e. the elapsed time from when the
leading vehicle began to brake to when the alarm was
presented) was considered as a contributing factor in
determining driver behaviour. Table 1 presents mean alarm
times (and standard deviations) for the actual values
achieved in the different experimental conditions. It can
be clearly seen that vehicle speed has a much smaller
inﬂuence on alarm time compared with headway value.
3.1. Braking event to brake onset time
Braking event to brake onset time was analysed in order
to estimate the effect of the presentation of alarms on net
reaction to imminent collision situations.
The ﬁrst analysis considered the effect of early alarm
timing with respect to time headways. Fig. 2 illustrates
mean values for braking event to brake onset time in
response to time headway. For short time headways, it
appears that braking event to brake onset time tends to
decrease
when
an
alarm
is
provided.
The
standard
deviation for the early alarm timing condition is also
smaller than that for the no alarm condition. There was a
signiﬁcant difference in variance between ‘early alarm
timing’
and
‘no
alarms’
conditions,
Fð1; 64Þ ¼ 8:42,
po0:01. With respect to the mean values, a signed rank
sum test showed that there was a signiﬁcant difference
between the two conditions (Z ¼ 2:09, po0:05).
For long time headways, there was no signiﬁcant
difference between the conditions. However, it appeared
that, compared to the early alarm timing condition, the
transition time for the no alarm condition varied widely. In
fact, there was a signiﬁcant difference in deviation between
the two conditions, Fð1; 64Þ ¼ 4:72, po0:05. With respect
to interactions between driving speed and the presentation
of alarms, no statistically signiﬁcant interactions were
observed.
To sum up, the results suggest that the effect of the
presentation of alarms may vary according to driving
conditions even when the same alarm trigger logic is used.
The explanation for this phenomenon may derive from the
timing of the alarm presentation in response to driving
conditions. In other words, if alarms are presented at the
mean value of alarm time for relatively early alarms in
short headway driving (i.e. 0.149 s) then these alarms may
decrease braking reaction compared to the no alarm
condition. However, if alarms are presented at the mean
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 1
Summary of alarm time for each driving condition
Velocity
40 mile/h
60 mile/h
70 mile/h
Time headway
Long (2.2 s)
Early: 0.641 (0.071)
Early: 0.533 (0.105)
Early: 0.498 (0.103)
Late: 1.104 (0.126)
Late: 1.442 (0.262)
Late: 1.484 (0.439)
Short (1.7 s)
Early: 0.190 (0.078)
Early: 0.182 (0.081)
Early: 0.074 (0.056)
Late: 0.661 (0.081)
Late: 0.782 (0.080)
Late: 0.859 (0.110)
Braking event to brake onset time (s)
Mean
±SD
short time headways
early timing
early timing
no alarms
no alarms
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
long time headways
0.93
1.20
1.12
1.14
Fig. 2. The impact of the presentation of early alarm timing on braking
event to brake onset time in response to time headways.
G. Abe, J. Richardson / Applied Ergonomics 37 (2006) 577–586
580

--- Page 5 ---
value of alarm time for relatively early alarms in long
headway driving (i.e. 0.557 s) these alarms have no
potential to decrease braking reaction. Furthermore, with
respect to the overall effects of alarms on driver behaviour,
the presentation of alarms at the mean value of alarm time
for relatively early alarms for all driving conditions (i.e.
0.353 s) may lead to more consistent braking reaction to
imminent collision situations than when no alarms are
provided.
The effect of late alarm timing is considered next. Fig. 3
illustrates mean values of braking event to brake onset time
in response to time headway. For short time headways,
there is no signiﬁcant difference between ‘late timing’
and ‘no alarms’ conditions. For long time headways, a
statistically signiﬁcant difference in mean values was
observed between the two conditions, Fð1; 53Þ ¼ 5:32,
po0:05. With respect to interactions between driving speed
and the presentation of alarms, no statistically signiﬁcant
interactions were observed.
The results suggest that the presentation of late alarms
has no potential to improve driver braking reaction time to
imminent collision situations, and with longer headways a
later alarm timing may actually lead to an increase in
braking event to brake onset time.
3.2. The timing of accelerator release and accelerator
release to brake onset
Changes in the timing of release of the accelerator in
response to the timing of the alarms were considered next.
Fig. 4 illustrates braking event to accelerator release time
for ‘early timing’ and ‘no alarm’ conditions in response to
time headways. As with short time headways, a signed rank
sum test showed that there was a signiﬁcant difference
between the two conditions (Z ¼ 2:09, po0:05). With
respect to long time headways, the presentation of alarms
did not affect the timing of release of the accelerator. No
statistically signiﬁcant interactions between driving speed
and the presentation of alarms were observed.
Fig. 5 presents the effect of the presentation of late
alarms on the time from braking event to accelerator
release in response to time headway. With respect to long
time headways it appeared that, compared with the no
alarm condition, the transition time for the late timing
condition varied widely. A Levene’s test revealed that there
was a signiﬁcant difference in variance between the two
conditions, Fð1; 63Þ ¼ 8:10, po0:01. However, there was
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Braking event to brake onset time (s)
Mean
±SD
short time headways
late timing
late timing
no alarm
no alarm
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
long time headways
0.94
0.92
1.07
0.95
Fig. 3. The impact of the late timing of the alarms on braking event to
brake onset time in response to time headways.
Braking event to accelerator release time (s)
Mean
±SD
short time headways
early timing
early timing
no alarm
no alarm
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
long time headways
0.60
0.81
0.81
0.82
Fig. 4. The impact of the early timing of the alarms on braking event to
accelerator release time in response to time headways.
Braking envet to accelerator release time (s)
Mean
±SD
short time headways
late timing
no alarm
late timing
no alarm
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
long time headways
0.73
0.62
0.65
0.65
Fig. 5. The impact of the late timing of the alarms on braking event to
accelerator release time in response to time headways.
G. Abe, J. Richardson / Applied Ergonomics 37 (2006) 577–586
581

--- Page 6 ---
no signiﬁcant difference in mean values between the
two conditions. With respect to short time headways, no
statistically
signiﬁcant
differences
were
observed.
No
statistically signiﬁcant interactions between driving speed
and the presentation of alarms were observed.
With respect to accelerator release to brake onset time,
no statistically signiﬁcant differences were observed be-
tween the two alarm conditions and time headways. It can
be said that the presentation of alarms may have no
particular potential to impact on driver braking response
after release of the accelerator.
These results are partly consistent with the earlier results
related to driver braking response. That is, decreased
braking event to brake onset time may derive from prompt
release of the accelerator, depending on the timing of the
alarms. Furthermore it is possible that the increased
variation in accelerator release timing which is associated
with late alarms when driving with long time headways,
may be linked to delayed driver braking response.
How should driver performance with late alarms when
driving with relatively long headways, be interpreted? In
relatively low severity car-following situations, for example
with long headways, drivers have more time to decide when
to start braking compared with short headway driving.
Furthermore,
for
drivers
who
know
alarms will
be
provided in imminent collision situations, they may expect
to respond on the presentation of alarms. Accordingly, due
to combined effect of alarm timing and driving demand,
late alarms may induce increased variation in accelerator
release timing, resulting in longer braking reaction time.
3.3. Driver trust according to driving conditions
Fig. 6 shows the effect of time headways on driver trust
for early and late alarms. It appeared that ratings of trust
for early alarm timing were similar for both short and long
headways. However with respect to late alarm timing, it
seemed that trust ratings for long time headways were
lower than those for short time headways. A two-way
ANOVA found a signiﬁcant interaction between time
headway and alarm timing Fð1; 115Þ ¼ 4:51, p ¼ 0:0357. A
Tukey’s post-hoc test revealed a signiﬁcant difference in
mean values for late alarm between two time headways
(po0:01).
The results suggest that trust in early alarms was higher,
irrespective of time headways. Furthermore, time headway
may affect driver judgement of trust with late alarms.
3.4. Driver perceived alarm timing and its relation to trust
and alarm time
The relationship between driver perceived alarm timing
and subjective ratings of trust will now be considered.
First,
the
relationship
between
pre-determined
alarm
timing (early and late alarm timings) and perceived alarm
timing (Table 2) is conﬁrmed. As can be seen in this table,
early alarm timing had a tendency to be perceived as
correct timing while late alarm timing was perceived as late
in the driving conditions used in this study.
Fig. 7 illustrates ratings of trust in alarms which were
estimated as having a correct or late timing. There was a
signiﬁcant
difference
between
the
two
trust
values,
Fð1:115Þ ¼ 118:32, po0:01. The result suggests that driver
perception of alarm timing reﬂects ratings of trust and,
more speciﬁcally, trust in alarms which were judged as late
was lower than trust in alarms judged as having correct
timing.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
short
long
time headways
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
trust
6.7
3.9
5.2
6.8
early alarm timing
late alarm timing
Fig. 6. The effect of time headways on trust according to alarm timing.
Table 2
Summary of perceived alarm timing and pre-determined alarm timing
Early
(perceived)
Correct
(perceived)
Late
(perceived)
Early alarm timing
1 (2%)
43 (65%)
22 (33%)
Late alarm timing
—
18 (34%)
35 (66%)
late
correct
perceived timing
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
trust
4.3
7.3
Fig. 7. Trust ratings for perceived late and correct timing.
G. Abe, J. Richardson / Applied Ergonomics 37 (2006) 577–586
582

--- Page 7 ---
Fig. 8 presents the relationship between perceived alarm
timing and actual alarm time. In this ﬁgure the dotted line
represents the mean value of time for the release of the
accelerator when no alarms were given. Interestingly, there
is a possibility that if alarms are presented later, compared
with driver’s own performance in releasing the accelerator
without the aid of alarms, then alarms will be viewed as
being late.
3.5. The relationship between driver trust and alarm timing
Driver trust and its relation to actual alarm time when
alarms were presented after potential collision events
happened were considered next. With respect to ratings
of trust, a transformation was implemented using Z-scores
in order to minimise differences in judgement of trust
between individuals and emphasize variation in judgement
of trust. First, the values of mean and standard deviation
of trust ratings across all trials were calculated. Z-scores
were then calculated for each alarm condition in order to
provide a standardized rating of each participant’s trust.
Speciﬁcally, the values of Z-scores were found by
Z ¼ fðtrust value for each participant and each trialÞ
 ðthe mean value of trust for all participants
and all trialsÞg=ðthe value of standard deviation
for trust ratings for all participant and all trialsÞ:
Accordingly,
the
Z-scores
represent
how
far
each
participant’s trust estimation is different from the centre
of distribution of ratings of trust for all participants.
Fig. 9 comprises a scatter plot showing alarm time and
trust
Z-scores.
A
negative
correlation
was
found
(R ¼ 0:46, po0:01). This result indicates that as alarms
are issued later, with respect to potential collision events,
then ratings of trust are lower.
Next, data which were not always consistent with the
overall trend (i.e. as alarms are provided earlier driver trust
is higher) were considered in order to understand their
particular
characteristics.
The
horizontal
dotted
line
represents the mean trust value in terms of Z-score (i.e.
zero). The vertical dotted line indicates mean value of
accelerator release time without the aid of alarms. As can
be seen in this ﬁgure, all plotted points are assigned to the 4
zones, which are created by the two dotted lines. For the
plotted points which are involved in Zones A and C, alarm
time and its relation to trust is reasonably understandable
as these data can be interpreted using the last analysis of
correlation. That is, the earlier the presentation of alarms
the higher the trust rating.
However, the data in Zones B and D requires further
consideration since some data seem to fall outside the
overall trend. In total 10 data and 21 data points were
included in Zones B and D, respectively. These data
represent relatively late alarms associated with relatively
high trust values and alternatively early alarms and low
trust ratings. In Zone B 40% of all the data were associated
with long time headways. In particular, the three data
points which are enclosed by a solid circle seem to lie well
outside the trend and these data were all related to driving
with long time headways. In Zone D 71% of all the data
were associated with short time headways. Also the 10 data
points which are enclosed by a dotted circle seem to lie well
outside the overall trend and eight data points (80%) were
related to driving with short time headways. Table 3
summarised these data in terms of their speed/headway
conditions.
The results may suggest that, as an overall trend, as
alarms are provided earlier driver trust is higher. On the
other hand, in situations where driving demand is relatively
low (i.e. when driving with long time headways) driver
subjective ratings of trust may exhibit ‘tolerance’, i.e. trust
is relatively high even though alarms are relatively late.
Conversely, in situations where driving demand is relatively
high, i.e. when driving at high speed with short time
ARTICLE IN PRESS
late
correct
perceived timing
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
alarm time (s)
0.72:
accelerator release
time for no alarms
0.77
0.51
Mean
± SD
Fig. 8. The relationship between perceived alarm timing and actual alarm
time.
Zone A
Zone B
Zone D
Zone C
Z-Score
2.0
-2.0
-2.5
1.5
-1.5
1.0
-1.0
0.5
-0.5
0.0
0.0
Warning time
-0.2
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8
r = -0.46
Fig. 9. The relationship between alarm time and trust.
G. Abe, J. Richardson / Applied Ergonomics 37 (2006) 577–586
583

--- Page 8 ---
headways, driver ratings of trust may be ‘intolerant’, i.e.
trust is relatively low even though alarms are relatively
early. Clearly, these possibilities are not consistent with the
overall trend but do suggest another aspect of the nature of
trust; that is trust may be affected by not only alarm timing
but also by driving demand.
3.6. Alarm time, driver performance, and trust
In this section, the analyses of alarm time, driver braking
performance, trust and their interaction will be integrated
in order to provide a human factors perspective in the
design of FCWS. Although many factors inﬂuence the
occurrence of collision events in real trafﬁc only the sudden
deceleration of the leading vehicle was used to create
potential collision events in the scenarios employed in this
study. Accordingly, the following argument can only be
applied to these limited collision situations.
It was found that the timing of alarms (i.e. when alarms
are activated) was an important contributing factor in
determining driver performance, trust and the perception
of alarm timing. In this study two predetermined alarm
timings were generated by manipulating parameters of the
alarm trigger logic (SDA), however the actual alarm timing
varied according to driving conditions (three driving speeds
and two time headways). Accordingly, the variation in
actual alarm time may impact on driver objective and
subjective data. In other words, even when the same
predetermined alarm timings were used the transition time
from a braking event onset to arriving at the warning
distance varied in response to the driving conditions. In
particular, it was found that time headways may have more
potential to inﬂuence alarm time than driving speeds. That
is, compared with the differences in driving speeds, the
differences in time headways may lead to greater variation
in alarm time with the same alarm trigger logic.
When driving with short time headways the presentation
of early alarms (mean alarm time 0.149 s) reduced driver
braking response time and produced a more consistent
braking response. Furthermore, trust in these alarms was
relatively high. When driving with long time headways,
however, early alarms generated by the same trigger logic
with the same parameter exhibit a different effect on driver
behaviour; there was no improved driver braking response.
Interestingly trust in these alarms (mean alarm time
0.557 s) was also relatively high.
The research evidence suggests that improved driver
performance with alarms is not always necessary in order
to gain relatively high trust ratings and alarm timing may
be a more important factor in determining driver trust. As
to the overall trend, if alarms are presented earlier trust is
higher. It is not surprising that drivers rate early alarms as
more trustworthy as these alarms have the potential to give
drivers more time in which to implement a braking
response to imminent collisions. More importantly, how-
ever, some data may exhibit ‘tolerance’, that is trust is high
even when alarms are late when driving with long time
headways. Moreover, some data may exhibit ‘intolerance’,
that is trust is low even when alarms are early when driving
with short time headways. These results suggest that driver
trust may be affected by driving conditions and it is
necessary to look at driving demand carefully when
considering driver trust. In the near future it is possible
that individual differences which may affect driver trust
could be incorporated into the design of alarm systems.
Such systems could accumulate personal data regarding
driving ‘style’, driver expectation, etc. while driving with
collision
warning
systems,
in
order
to
design
more
personalised driver assistance systems which achieve higher
levels of trust and utilisation. The current results may have
the potential to contribute to new design strategies for
meeting the needs of individual drivers.
As already discussed above, driver perception of alarm
time may play an important role in determining driver
trust. Accordingly other research questions arise from this
argument. What might inﬂuence driver perception of alarm
timing to explain why alarms may be viewed as early,
correct or late? This study suggests a possible answer to
this question. The timing of release of the accelerator
without alarms, i.e. driver baseline performance (mean
value 0.72 s), may have the potential to determine driver
perception of alarm timing, i.e. correct timing or late
timing. Moreover, whether alarms are actuated before this
timing is an important determinant of driver ratings of
trust and if alarms are presented after this timing, then
trust is impaired.
It is necessary to incorporate these results into the design
of alarm timings to enable the development of more
effective systems. The ﬁnding that the timing of the release
ARTICLE IN PRESS
Table 3
Summary of characteristics for error data
Zone B
Zone D
Driving condition
(speed/headway time)
Number of times
observed data
Driving condition
(speed/headway time)
Number of times of
observed data
70/long
2
70/short
5
40/long
1
60/short
2
40/short
1
70/long
1
60/long
1
G. Abe, J. Richardson / Applied Ergonomics 37 (2006) 577–586
584

--- Page 9 ---
of the accelerator can determine perceived late and correct
alarms
suggests
that
alarm
presentation
has
to
be
consistent with driver action to facilitate collision avoid-
ance. Reichart (1993) argued that the behaviour of
driver support systems had to be consistent with driver
expectation to ensure system efﬁciency and it can be
said that this study found an alarm timing which was
consistent with driver expectation resulted in relatively high
ratings of trust. It is logical to assume that alarms should
be provided as early as possible in order to give drivers
more time to respond to critical situations. However,
early alarms have been frequently regarded as nuisance
alarms
or
perceived
false
alarms
even
when
‘true’
(for example Janssen et al., 1993) and these alarms
may have a negative impact on system efﬁciency (Hancock
and Parasuraman, 1992). The important thing is to balance
two conﬂicting requirements—to deliver a timing that is
late enough to minimise the problem of perceived nuisance
alarms and early enough to elicit higher ratings of driver
trust. This study has provided an idea for optimisation of
the design of alarm timing, which reﬂects driver expecta-
tion and may also minimise decreased trust resulting
from the mismatch between alarm timing and driver
expectation.
Although this study provided important insight into
driver response to different alarm timings in several driving
conditions and the relation to driver trust, an important
limitation of the current study was the drivers’ anticipation
of the need to brake repeatedly while driving in the
simulator. This may result in faster alarm response times
than would have been obtained in a real driving environ-
ment. It would be necessary to include an experimental
condition in which drivers were not primed to anticipate
collision events in order to assess absolute values of
response time to FCWS in response to alarm timing.
Furthermore, this study provided drivers with a very
limited alarm presentation. It is likely that driver response
to alarms and trust in alarms may vary in response to
experience of FCWS and it is necessary to estimate the
long-term effects on driver attitudes and trust in order to
validate the results observed in this study.
4. Conclusions
This study considered six different driving conditions
according to speed and time headway and investigated
their effect on driver behaviour and on trust in the
presentation of alarms. The results support the following
conclusions:
1. When a SDA is employed, differences in driving
conditions induce variation in alarm time; the elapsed
time from when the leading vehicle begins to brake to
when the alarm is presented. This results in different
alarm effectiveness and driver perception of alarm
timing even if the same pre-determined parameters for
triggering alarms are employed.
2. Variation in alarm time mainly derives from differences
in time headway rather than from driving speed.
Accordingly time headways have a greater inﬂuence on
the
effect
of
the
alarm’s
presentation
on
driver
performance and perception of alarms.
3. In particular, when driving with long time headways,
drivers’
adaptation
to
late
alarms
may
induce
a
longer response to the brakes compared to the ‘no
alarm’ condition, possibly resulting in impaired driver
behaviour.
4. Driver
perception
of
alarm
timing
reﬂects
driver
subjective rating of trust in an alarm relatively well.
Accordingly, trust in perceived late alarms is lower than
trust in perceived correct alarms. There is a possibility
that a threshold between perceived late and correct
alarm timings derive from the timing of release of the
accelerator for avoiding collisions without the aid of a
warning system. That is, when alarms are provided after
this time they may be perceived as late alarms.
5. Overall a positive correlation between alarm promptness
and driver ratings of trust was found. However, some
data indicated another trend describing driver trust and
alarm timing and their interactions with driving condi-
tions. Speciﬁcally, when driving with long time head-
ways, driver trust in a relatively late timing was not
decreased. On the other hand, when driving with short
time headways, driver trust in relatively early timing was
decreased.
References
Abe, G., Richardson, J., 2004. The effect of alarm timing on driver
behaviour: an investigation of differences in driver trust and response
to alarms according to alarm timing. Transp. Res. Part F 7 (4–5),
307–322.
Alm, H., Nilsson, L., 2000. Incident warning systems and trafﬁc safety: a
comparison between the PORTICO and MELYSSA test site systems.
Transp. Hum. Factors 2 (1), 77–93.
Ben-Yaacov, A., Maltz, M., Shinar, D., 2002. Effects of an in-vehicle
collision avoidance warning system on short- and long-term driving
performance. Hum. Factors 44 (2), 335–342.
Bliss, J.P., Acton, S.A., 2003. Alarm mistrust in automobiles: how
collision alarm reliability affects driving. Appl. Ergon. 34, 499–509.
Dingus, T.A., Jahns, S.K., Horowitz, A.D., Knipling, R., 1998. Human
factors design issues for crash avoidance systems. In: Barﬁeld, W.,
Dingus, T.A. (Eds.), Human Factors in Intelligent Transportation
Systems. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, New Jersey, pp. 55–93.
Green, M., 2000. How long does it take to stop? Methodological analysis
of driver perception-brake times. Transp. Hum. Factors 2 (3), 195–216.
Hancock, P.A., Parasuraman, R., 1992. Human factors and safety in the
design of intelligent vehicle-highway systems (IVHS). J. Safety Res. 23,
181–198.
Hancock, P.A., Verwey, W.B., 1997. Fatigue, workload and adaptive
driver systems. Accident Anal. Prevent. 29 (4), 495–506.
Janssen, W., Nilsson, L., 1993. Behavioural effects of driver support. In:
Parkes, A.M., Fransen, S. (Eds.), Driving Future Vehicles. Taylor &
Francis, London, pp. 147–155.
Janssen, W.H., Alm, H., Michon, J.A., Smiley, A., 1993. Driver support.
In: Michon, J.A. (Ed.), Generic Intelligent Driver Support. Taylor &
Francis, London.
Kantowitz, B.H., 2000. In-vehicle information systems: premise, promises,
and pitfalls. Transp. Hum. Factors 2 (4), 359–379.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
G. Abe, J. Richardson / Applied Ergonomics 37 (2006) 577–586
585

--- Page 10 ---
Lee, J.D., Kantowitz, B.H., 1998. Perceptual and cognitive aspects
of intelligent transportation systems. In: Barﬁeld, W., Dingus, T.A.
(Eds.),
Human
Factors
in
Intelligent
Transportation
Systems.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, New Jersey, pp. 31–54.
Lee, J., Moray, N., 1992. Trust, control strategy and allocation of function
in human-machine systems. Ergonomics 35 (10), 1243–1270.
Lee, J.D., McGehee, D.V., Brown, T.L., Reyes, M.L., 2002. Collision
warning timing, driver distraction, and driver response to imminent
rear-end collisions in a high-ﬁdelity driving simulator. Hum. Factors
44 (2), 314–334.
Leeds Advanced Driving Simulator. 2004. Available online at: http://
www.its.leeds.ac.uk/facilities/lads/ (accessed April 2005).
Muir, B., 1994. Trust in automation, Part I: theoretical issues in the study
of trust and human intervention in automation systems. Ergonomics
37 (11), 1905–1922.
Muir, B., Moray, N., 1996. Trust in automation, Part II: theoretical issues
in the study of trust and human intervention in automation systems.
Ergonomics 39 (3), 429–460.
Parasuraman, R., Riley, V., 1997. Human and automation: use, misuse,
disuse, abuse. Hum. Factors 39 (2), 230–253.
Parasuraman, R., Hancock, P.A., Oloﬁnboba, O., 1997. Alarm effective-
ness in driver-centered collision warning systems. Ergonomics 40 (3),
390–399.
Reichart, G., 1993. Human and technical reliability. In: Parkes, A.M.,
Franzen, S. (Eds.), Driving Future Vehicles. Taylor & Francis,
London, pp. 409–418.
Satchell, P., 1998. Innovation Automation. Ashgate, London.
Wilson, T.B., Butler, W., Maghee, V., Dingus, T.A., 1997. Forward-
looking collision warning system performance guidelines. SAE Paper,
970456.
ARTICLE IN PRESS
G. Abe, J. Richardson / Applied Ergonomics 37 (2006) 577–586
586
