--- Page 1 ---
 
 
  
Abstract— We present an improvement of forward collision 
warning (FCW) by adding more layers of warning functionality 
based on five stages of crash timeline. Generally, FCW operates 
at stage 3, the critical moment before crash. The added 
functionality is the location-based warning (LW) which warns 
the driver when driving toward a dangerous spot with high 
speed. LW operates at stage 2, an open condition to crash 
which comes from bad driving habit. We propose the use of 
warning lag time as a performance indicator, which is 
appropriate for real driving experiment. The warning lag time 
is defined as the time period between the issue of warning and 
the execution of brake by a normal driver. We performed real 
driving experiments with normal drivers and compare their 
brake actions with warnings from our system. The system with 
FCW alone achieved an average time lag of 1.47 sec., while the 
system with both FCW+LW can warn the driver faster with 
average time lag of 1.32 sec. The accuracy of both systems was 
about the same at 79%. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In many traffic accidents, the damage to lives and 
properties is so severe that it cannot be estimated. This 
problem brings about the development of safety systems in 
order to reduce both accidents and injuries. One common 
cause of vehicle accidents is driver’s inattentiveness to the 
driving task because of interrupting calls or readiness of his 
driving conditions such as fatigue or sleepiness. Since the 
major cause of accidents comes from human errors, active 
safety and intelligent driving assistance system are necessary 
solutions for future transportation. 
The forward collision warning (FCW) is an emerging 
technology that has been developed to help drivers avoid 
collisions by giving warnings in dangerous situations. FCW 
systems usually implement variety of sensors in order to 
measure the distance to the front cars, the velocity, and the 
acceleration of the equipped cars [1], [2]. Then, these 
measured quantities are used in a mathematic model of 
vehicles’ motion to predict potential crashes. In general, 
forward collision warning signals can be issued within the 
last few seconds before crash, called the critical moment.  
This may not be enough for sluggish drivers to avoid a crash 
in tight situations. Therefore, there are many researchers who 
made efforts to predict car crashes and increase time period 
between warning and crash called pre-warning time. Causes 
 
 
of frontal collision, such as following distance, speed, 
acceleration, deceleration, road environment, etc., are 
considered as parameters to enhance FCW system. Masumi 
et al. [3] included braking reaction time of a driver and a 
relative safety distance margin in the vehicle’s motion model 
in order to increase the pre-warning time. The vehicle 
deceleration is also a significant parameter of collision 
model. Deceleration for collision avoidance (DCA) is 
calculated and used as an indicator of forward collision risk 
[4], [5]. Another interesting method to enhance FCW systems 
is a combination method. Road environment detection, such 
as lane departure, and frontal obstacles, is utilized to improve 
the performance of FCW systems. Chih-Li Hou et al. [6] 
integrated an FCW system together with a lane departure 
warning system based on image processing and the vehicle 
kinematic model. The mentioned work accomplished 
improvement of FCW systems in term of accuracy. However, 
they did not demonstrate how much they can increase the 
pre-warning time, which is an important indicator to assess 
performance of FCW systems. There is a work [7] that 
compared the system warning signals and the signals of 
driver’s brake in order to show that they can increase the pre-
warning time. They developed a FCW system based on 
THASV-II platform. The result demonstrated that the system 
warnings correspond to driver’s brake behavior without 
measurement of the pre-waning time.  
Our proposed idea to enhance FCW system is adding 
more functionalities of the warning to increase the pre-
warning time. This can be done by analyzing the 
characteristic of collision and divide it into five levels. We 
implement a system that operates on multilevel of safety, 
which will help increase the performance. As mentioned 
above, the literature work attempted to predict frontal 
collisions and demonstrated their system’s performance in 
the form of accuracy. In our work, we use warning lag time 
as a performance metric (section IV) because FCW requires a 
responsive vehicle maneuver in a short period of time to 
avoid accidents.  The increase of pre-warning time in just a 
fraction of a second can mean life or death. Therefore, pre-
warning time is a crucial property, in which we chose to be 
our performance indicator. 
This paper is organized as follows. The concept of 
general FCW systems is described in section II. The 
proposed improvement of FCW system is presented in 
Improvement of Warning Lag Time in Forward Collision Warning 
Systems based on Multifunctional Warnings 
Peachanika Thammakaroon and Poj Tangamchit 
Department of Control System and Instrumentation Engineering 
King Mongkut’s University of Technology Thonburi 
Bangkok, Thailand 
e-mail: peachanika@gmail.com, poj.tan@kmutt.ac.th 
2012 IEEE International Conference on Vehicular Electronics and Safety
July 24-27, 2012. Istanbul, Turkey
978-1-4673-0993-6/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE
146

--- Page 2 ---
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Forward collision warning system (FCW). 
a method to improve FCW system. The warning lag time 
evaluation, a key performance of this work, is demonstrated 
in section IV. The systems were tested in real driving 
situation and the results are presented in section V. The 
conclusion is explained in section VI. 
II. FORWARD COLLISION WARNING (FCW) SYSTEM 
A forward collision warning system is an active pre-crash 
vehicle safety system. FCW informs the driver of possible 
frontal collisions to help the driver be aware of accidents and 
perform collision avoidance maneuvers. Generally, most of 
the FCW systems have been developed based on a kinematic 
model of collision in order to warn a driver of a potential 
crash when the distance to the front car is closer than the 
distance required for safe brake. The model involves 
equations of motion, which included distances, velocities, 
and accelerations. Many types of sensors are utilized to 
obtain distance to the front car, relative velocity to the car in 
front, the car’s velocity, acceleration, etc. in order to 
construct a vehicle kinematic model and estimate frontal 
collision risks. 
In our work, the FCW system we intended to improve is 
based on a basic formula of a vehicle kinematic model as 
shown in (1). We calculate the estimated time to the car in 
front (Ts) from a current position of a host car to a front car 
by using a current velocity of the host vehicle (v) and a 
current following distance (D). The vehicle’s acceleration 
and the velocity of obstacle/car in the front are assumed to be 
zero in order to make the model as simple as possible.  
The warnings are determined based on the two-second 
rule, which is a concept from defensive driving technique. 
The rule suggests that a driver has to keep a following 
distance at least 2 seconds from the car in front. The warning 
is active when Ts is less than this 2-second threshold. 
However, we found that 2 seconds were not suitable for roads 
in Bangkok, which has quite aggressive driving habit. 
Therefore, we reduced the threshold down to 1.6 seconds. 
This number came from trial and error in real driving 
experiments, in which we found that this value is the most 
suitable. The system computes the Ts value repeatedly 
according to the formula below, and gives a warning if the 
value is less than the threshold. 
 
v
D
Ts =
 
(1)         ((   
III. IMPROVEMENT OF FORWARD COLLISION WARNING 
Since the average pre-warning time of typical FCW 
systems is quite short, there are efforts to increase this pre-
warning time. We used another performance metric called 
 
Figure 2.  Five levels for crash prevention with the safety level of FCW 
system and the added warning system. 
warning lag time which is directly related to the pre-warning 
time. We treat the warning lag time as the key performance 
of our FCW system. We propose that the improvement of 
FCW by increasing warning lag time can be performed in 
two ways. The first method, proposed in this paper, can be 
implemented by adding multilevel safe drive capability. The 
levels are divided into 5 levels according to collision risk. 
The second method is our future work, which will improve 
FCW systems by using a communication channel to promote 
cooperative driving among several vehicles. This idea is the 
implementation of distributed sensing in order to increase the 
range of sensors. 
A. Multilevel of crash prevention 
In our work, car crash event is divided into five levels 
according to collision risk as illustrated in Fig. 2. The 
minimal collision risk is classified as the first level. In this 
level, the driver pays attention while driving and follows 
traffic laws strictly. The possibility of accidents is very low. 
From the first level, if the driver places himself in an open 
condition to collision, he will be in the second level. The 
open condition to collision is usually caused by the violation 
of traffic regulation. In the second level, if the driver does not 
take a suitable maneuver to recover the driving situation back 
to the first level, the driving situation will turn into the third 
level which is a critical moment of crash avoidance. In the 
third level, the driver can avoid collision if he has good skills 
of maneuver such as harsh brake or crisp turn. However, 
when the crash becomes unavoidable, the moment before 
crash is classified as the fourth level. The fifth level is the 
time period after crash.  
From five levels of crash prevention, typical FCW 
systems operate on stage 3, the critical moment. It is the 
moment about 2-3 seconds before the impact. In order to 
increase pre-warning time, we implemented FCW system 
according to the multilevel of safety based on assumption 
that the pre-warning time can be increased by combining 
FCW system with the warning system that operates on stage 
2, open condition, in order to prevent a driver getting into 
stage 3, critical moment. We chose the location-based 
warning system (LW) for this purpose. The location-based 
warning operates at stage 2 because it will warn the driver 
when the driver drives toward a dangerous spot such as a
147

--- Page 3 ---
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Combination of FCW and LW systems. 
intersection or a sharp curve with high speed. The vehicle 
may go pass the intersection without a problem if there is no 
car around. However, this move has a high risk. If there is 
another car approaching from the side, the situation will turn 
from stage 2 into stage 3 and the driver may have to apply 
sharp brake later on. Therefore, the warning when 
approaching an intersection is considered as warning on stage 
2 because the driver has placed himself into an open 
condition by driving too fast. 
B. Combination of FCW and LW system 
We chose location-based warning to enhance FCW 
because it is the most reliable system that works on stage 2. 
The main reason is that the warnings generated are from 
static environment. Location-based warning system informs a 
driver about potentially dangerous places (called accident 
hotspots) before reaching them in order to help a driver 
become aware of the dangers and prepare to slow down 
before reaching the hotspots. The accident hotspots are 
dangerous places which possibly lead to accidents such as a 
zebra cross, an intersection, a dangerous curve road, etc.  
We combined FCW and LW systems by summing up the 
warning outputs from both systems. The two systems run 
separately and concurrently as illustrated in Fig. 3. Two 
sensors were utilized and connected to a computer to obtain 
driving information for FCW and LW. A laser rangefinder 
was used to measure a following distance. A GPS module 
was used to obtain a vehicle status such as speed, vehicle 
position (latitude and longitude) and heading. For FCW, the 
following distance and the speed were used to determine a 
warning as described in section II.  For LW, a warning was 
calculated from vehicle’s speed, vehicle’s position and 
vehicle’s heading according to the following equation. 



<
−
>
<
=
otherwise
h
h
h
AND
v
v
AND
d
d
LW
th
D
th
th
,
0
)
(
)
(
)
(,
1
 
(2)  
For the LW system that we used, all accident hotspots 
were collected in a database. Each data point consists of 
latitude, longitude, speed limit and heading.  The car status 
from GPS will be compared to every data point nearby. If the 
location is close enough, the current velocity (v) exceeds the 
speed limit (vth), and the heading (h) points toward a 
dangerous place, then the system warning will be issued. For 
the current location-based warning system shown in (2), the 
speed limit (vth), and the range of warning distance from 
hotspots (dth) are 30km/h and 30 m. respectively.  hD is the 
angle from vehicle position, used as an origin point, to the 
nearest hotspot in the database. If an absolute difference of h 
and hD is not over hth, it means that the car is moving toward 
the hotspot. As shown in Fig. 4., we differentiate a vehicle 
direction that it is going into or going out of a hotspot by 
considering a vehicle’s heading (h) and an angle from vehicle 
position to the nearest hotspot in the database (hD). When a 
vehicle is going into a hotspot, h and hD are same direction. In 
contrast, h and hD are opposite direction when a vehicle is 
going out of a hotspot. 
IV. WARNING LAG TIME FOR PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
Since FCW systems are activated at a critical moment, 
within 2-5 seconds before accidents, timing is a crucial 
parameter. Some researchers focused their study on the pre-
warning time, which is defined as the time period between 
the issue of warning and the moment of crash impact. They 
assumed that pre-warning time can be measured, because 
crashes can be emulated in a driving simulator. Our work, 
which focuses on real driving situations and experiments, 
cannot simulate crashes. Therefore, we proposed another 
performance metric, the warning lag time as shown in Fig. 5 
and 6, which is used as a performance indicator in our 
experiments. The warning lag time is defined as the time 
period between the issue of warning and the execution of 
brake by a normal driver who has no active warning systems. 
In typical FCW systems, the warnings usually come after 
brakes from alert drivers because human perception is better 
than current sensing technology. As a result, human drivers 
can perceive more road environments and react quicker than 
a machine. 
We evaluated the warning lag time of our system based 
on the assumption that the pattern of system warning signal is 
similar to the pattern of actual brake signal.  However, the 
system warning has a short time-shift from the actual brake. 
Thus, this short time-shift is warning lag time of the system 
warning. After obtaining both data, we can evaluate warning 
lag time by following these steps. First, we calculate the 
cross-correlation between the actual brake and the system  
148

--- Page 4 ---
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Warning condition of Location-based warning system. 
output. The second step is finding the local maxima around 
the middle of cross-correlation output. This is because the 
time lag will not deviate much from the center (delay = 0 
sec). Finally, we get the warning lag time by measuring a 
distance between the center of cross-correlation output and 
the local maxima as shown in Fig. 7. This figure 
demonstrates the measurement of warning lag time by a 
cross-correlation result of the actual brake and the system 
warning of FCW system with LW system. The vertical line 
indicates the center of cross-correlation output (no shift). The 
local maxima point is on the right of the center. This means 
that the system warning happens before the actual brake with 
the measured pre-warning time.  On the other hand, if the 
local maxima point is on the left, it indicates that the system 
warning delays from the actual brake. 
V. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
Our system consists of three sensors installed in a test 
vehicle as shown in Fig. 8. The first sensor is a laser 
rangefinder mounted at the car’s windshield and pointed 
forward. This sensor is used to obtain the distance between 
the test car and a car in the front. The second sensor is a GPS 
receiver used to obtain the car’s status consisting of latitude, 
longitude, speed and heading of the car on the earth. The last 
one is a force sensing resistor (FSR) equipped on a brake 
pedal to obtain actual brake actions of the driver. The force 
sensor is used only for performance evaluation purpose. It is 
not needed for normal operation of the warning system. 
These sensors are connected to a main computer in order to 
record and process the data. 
The purpose of the experiments is to demonstrate that the 
warning lag time can be increased by adding the functionality 
of a FCW system with a location-based warning system. We 
tested both systems, the FCW system with and without 
Location-based warning system, in real driving situation for 
30 minutes on city roads. The test route consists of 28 
accident hotspots. For testing purpose, the driver does not 
know the output of the systems, so that his driving behavior 
is independent to the output from the systems. 
For performance evaluation, we determined two 
performance parameters which are the warning lag time and 
the accuracy of system warning. The accuracy of system 
warning is the comparison result between the system 
warnings and the actual brakes as shown in Fig. 9. After 
determining the warning lag time, the time-scale of system 
warnings was shifted by the warning lag time before 
calculating the accuracy in order to measure the system 
warnings corresponding to the actual brakes.  
 
 
Figure 5.  The pre-warning time and the warning lag time in a timeline of 
driving situation. 
 
Figure 6.  The increased warning lag time 
when enhancing FCW by adding LW. 
From Table I., the accuracy of the combination FCW+ 
LW system decreases from the accuracy of FCW alone for 
about 0.53%. The main cause of false negatives of FCW in 
this test is the traffic congestion of the road that we 
performed the test. When the car stopped, the driver still left 
his foot on the brake pedal. This was counted as a brake 
action, while the FCW system did not give any warning when 
the car did not move.  The output from FCW system has an 
average delay of 1.47 sec. from the actual brake, whereas the 
warning lag time of the combination system of FCW and LW 
is 1.32 sec. These results indicate that enhancing FCW 
system with location-based warning system can help improve 
the pre-warning time for 0.15 sec. (from the pre-waning time 
+1.47 sec. to the pre-warning time +1.32 sec.). 
 
Figure 7.  Measurement of warning lag time from cross-correlation 
between actual brakes and system output. 
 
 
149

--- Page 5 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  System Components: (a) Laser rangefinder and GPS receiver, 
and (b) Force Sensing Resistor for obtaining actual brakes of the driver 
TABLE I.  
THE RESULTS OF PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF THE 
FCW SYSTEM WITHOUT AND WITH LOCATION-BASED WARNING SYSTEM 
Warning 
System 
Warning 
lag time (s) 
Accuracy of system (%) 
Correct 
False 
positive 
False 
negative 
FCW 
+1.47 
79.54 
10.09 
10.37 
FCW with LW 
+1.32 
79.01 
10.66 
10.33 
(-) and (+) means the warning lag time happens before and after the actual brake respectively 
VI. CONCLUSION 
In this work, we improved the performance of FCW system 
to increase the warning lag time by adding the location-based 
warning system which is in the second level of the crash 
prevention hierarchy. In order to perform our system in real 
experiments, we proposed the warning lag time as the key 
performance which is a time period between an actual brake 
and a warning signal. We calculated the warning lag time 
based on correlation method as shown in section 3. The 
systems, FCW without and with LW, were tested in real 
driving situations in order to evaluate the performance of the 
enhanced FCW system. The results show that enhancing 
normal FCW system with the level 2 warning system can 
help increase the pre-warning time by 0.15 sec. with a small 
drop in accuracy. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Higher Education Research 
Promotion and National Research University Project of 
Thailand, Office of the Higher Education Commission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  The comparison of (a) the actual brakes with 
(b) the output of the FCW system and (c) the output of the combination of 
FCW and LW systems.. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
N. Srinivasa, Y. Chen, and C. Daniell, “A Fusion System for Real-
time Forward Collision Warning in Automobiles,” in Proc. of IEEE 
Conf. on Intelligent Transportation System, pp. 457–462, Oct., 2003. 
[2] 
H. Cheng, N. Zheng, L. Ma, J. Qin, and X. Zhang, “Vehicle Active 
Safety Applications by Fusing Multiple-Sensor for the Springrobot 
System,” ,” in Proc. of IEEE Int. Conf. on Vehicular Electronics and 
Safety (ICVES 2005), pp. 155-160, Oct., 2005. 
[3] 
M. Nakaoka, P. Raksincharoensak, and M. Naka, “Study on Forward 
Collision Warning System Adapted to Driver Characteristics and 
Road Environment,” in Proc. of Int. Conf. on Control, Automation 
and Systems (ICCAS), pp. 2890-2895, Oct., 2008. 
[4] 
T. Hiraoka, M. Tanaka, H. Kumamoto, T. Izumi, and  K. Hatanaka, 
“Collision risk evaluation index based on deceleration for collision 
avoidance (firstreport)–Proposal of a new index to evaluate collision 
risk against forward obstacles,” Review of Automotive Engineering, 
Vol. 30, No.4, pp.429–437, 2009. 
[5] 
S. Takada, T. Hiraoka, and H. Kawakami, “Forward obstacles 
collision warning system based on deceleration for collision 
avoidance,” in Proc. of SICE Annual Conference, pp 184 – 191, Sep., 
2011. 
[6] 
C-L Huo, Y-H Yu, J-C Syu, and T-Y Sun, “Vehicle Warning System 
for Land Departure and Collision Avoidance: Using Fuzzy Decision 
Making,” IEEE Int. Conf. on Fuzzy Systems 2011 (FUZZ),  pp. 1554 – 
1559, Jun., 2011. 
[7] 
Z. Lei, W. Jianqiang, and L. Keqiang, “Forward Collision Warning 
System Based on Thasv-ii Platform,”  ,” in Proc. of IEEE Int. Conf. 
on Vehicular Electronics and Safety (ICVES2006), pp. 255 – 258, 
Dec., 2006. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
150
