--- Page 1 ---
400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096-0001 U.S.A.   Tel: (724) 776-4841  Fax: (724) 776-0790   Web: www.sae.org
SAE TECHNICAL
PAPER SERIES
2007-01-1105
An Efficient Visual Forward Collision Warning
Display for Vehicles
Henrik Lind
Volvo Car Corporation
Reprinted From:  IVI Technology and Intelligent Transportation Systems
(SP-2099)
2007 World Congress
Detroit, Michigan
April 16-19, 2007
Downloaded from SAE International by University of Auckland, Saturday, August 04, 2018

--- Page 2 ---
By mandate of the Engineering Meetings Board, this paper has been approved for SAE publication upon
completion of a peer review process by a minimum of three (3) industry experts under the supervision of
the session organizer.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
without the prior written permission of SAE.
For permission and licensing requests contact:
SAE Permissions
400 Commonwealth Drive
Warrendale, PA 15096-0001-USA
Email: permissions@sae.org
Fax: 
724-776-3036
Tel: 
724-772-4028
For multiple print copies contact:
SAE Customer Service
Tel: 
877-606-7323 (inside USA and Canada)
Tel: 
724-776-4970 (outside USA)
Fax: 
724-776-0790
Email: CustomerService@sae.org
ISSN 0148-7191
Copyright © 2007 SAE International
Positions and opinions advanced in this paper are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of SAE.
The author is solely responsible for the content of the paper. A process is available by which discussions
will be printed with the paper if it is published in SAE Transactions.
Persons wishing to submit papers to be considered for presentation or publication by SAE should send the
manuscript or a 300 word abstract of a proposed manuscript to: Secretary, Engineering Meetings Board, SAE.
Printed in USA
Downloaded from SAE International by University of Auckland, Saturday, August 04, 2018

--- Page 3 ---
2007-01-1105
An Efficient Visual Forward Collision Warning Display
for Vehicles 
Henrik Lind 
Volvo Car Corporation 
Copyright © 2007 SAE International
ABSTRACT 
The aim of the present study was to investigate how 
quickly and efficiently distracted drivers react to four 
different visual warning displays intended for a Forward 
Collision Warning system for vehicles. The displays are 
the Collision Warning Head Up Display (CWHUD), the 
Steering Wheel Warning Display, The High Head Down 
Display (HHDD), and the Cluster display. The study was 
performed in a simulator. 
Warnings were randomly presented to drivers when they 
were visually distracted away from the road by a traffic 
sign discrimination task. Brake reaction times to the 
different warnings were recorded. From the results of 
performance tests and preference ratings, the CWHUD, 
provided the best performance in terms of 200 ms lower 
reaction time and low amount of missed warnings. The 
average brake reaction times were significantly faster 
for the CWHUD warnings. There were no significant 
differences in reaction times among the other three 
warnings. One CWHUD warning was missed during the 
experiment, whereas 17 High Head Down Display, 
HHDD, warnings were missed. The CWHUD was rated 
first among the user preferences. The second, third and 
fourth choices were HHDD, Cluster Display, and 
Steering Wheel Warning Displays. It is concluded from 
the results of this study that the CWHUD was the best of 
the four FCW visual displays tested in the study.  
The high performance and high subjective driver 
preference is contributed to the location color and 
brightness of the CWHUD providing the driver with an 
intuitive understanding of a forward braking vehicle.
INTRODUCTION 
The present study investigates the performance of 
different Forward Collision Warning (FCW) displays in a 
driving simulator. FCW systems provide alerts to assist 
drivers in avoiding or mitigating rear-end crashes. A 
warning must provide a fast and appropriate response 
from drivers in critical close to impact situations. The 
design of the warning displays for FCW is very 
important for safety because a poorly designed display 
may reduce its effectiveness.  
Figure 1 
Warning displays in study
It has been demonstrated that visual warnings are an 
essential component of the single stage FCW1 however 
there is much uncertainty about how and where this 
warning should appear. Conspicuity is an important 
issue in the design of warning displays.  Cole and 
Hughes2 discuss issues relating to visibility or target 
conspicuity while driving.  Conspicuity is “...the property 
that leads to a target object having a high probability of 
being seen within a very short time” 2 .  They summarize 
the 
following factors that determine conspicuity: 
eccentricity from line of sight, contrast between target 
and background, complexity of background, co lour and 
the boldness of information on the target.  For maximum 
conspicuity, a FCW visual warning display should be 
near to a driver's line of sight, have high contrast 
against a uniform background, and be bright and 
colorful.  Unfortunately it is not that simple, particularly 
for the line of sight issue.  
Guidelines recommend that visual warnings be placed 
within 15 degrees of the driver's normal sight line. The 
vast majority of driver's visual attention is on the forward 
road scene (roughly 85-90%3).  The visual warning 
should be easily visible when the driver is looking 
Downloaded from SAE International by University of Auckland, Saturday, August 04, 2018

--- Page 4 ---
forward.  More than 75% of the drivers are non-attentive 
to the road-way before a frontal collision according to 
the 100 cars naturalistic driving study7. If they were 
looking at the forward road scene, they would be able to 
see and avoid a hazardous situation.  Therefore an 
FCW system should be seen as an intelligent “Anti-
distraction system” and must provide the property of 
directing the sight of a distracted driver to the forward 
road scene. 
Where do drivers look when they are distracted (i.e., not 
looking at the road)? They could be checking their 
mirrors, looking ahead but not attending, interacting with 
an information system (e.g., radio), or perhaps talking 
with a passenger.  According to field research by 
Lansdown3 on drivers in the U.K., the mean percentage 
of time spent looking to the different regions of the 
visual scene were: 4.6 % rear-view mirror, 2.8 % right 
region, 1.3 % left region and 3.9 % instrument panel & 
centre stack. It is important that when drivers are 
looking in these four areas, and not looking at the road, 
the FCW display must also be visible.  Meanwhile, the 
display should still be central to the forward view 
because the warning must direct the driver's attention to 
the hazard.  A disadvantage of highly conspicuous 
visual displays is that they can capture attention rather 
than direct the eye to a hazard ahead.   
WARNING DISPLAY CHARACTERISTICS 
Two new warning display concepts, the Collision 
Warning Head Up Display, CWHUD, (figure 2) and the 
Steering Wheel Display (figure 5), with the aim to 
provide visibility, attention and intuitiveness.  
A selection of two different visual warning displays was 
made from literature and from market available 
systems. These were the High Head Down Display, 
HHDD (figure 3) and the Cluster Display (figure 4).  
Table 1 to 4 lists the characteristics of the warning 
displays. 
A flashing red warning was selected to allow for a good 
peripheral recognition of the activation. 
Each warning lasted 1.2 second and flashed at a rate of 
4 times per second.  The on flash lasted 0.15 seconds 
with 0.1 seconds between flashes.  The table below 
describes how the displays differed.  Figure 1 shows 
pictures of how the four different warnings appeared to 
the driver.  
COLLISION WARNING HEAD UP DISPLAY, CWHUD 
Figure 2  
Collision Warning Head Up Display 
Position: 
Top of instrument panel reflected in 
lower part of windscreen 
Appearance: 
Red light 
Intensity 
measured 
from eye 
position: 
1000 mcd 
Size: 
14.5 x 0,5 cm 
Light source: 
23 round clear red high intensity 
LED’s 
of 
1000mcd 
each. 
High 
intensity is required since only roughly 
10% of the visual intensity is reaching 
the eye through the reflection in 
windshield. 
Table 1  
Collision Warning Head Up Display 
characteristics
Downloaded from SAE International by University of Auckland, Saturday, August 04, 2018

--- Page 5 ---
HIGH HEAD DOWN DISPLAY, HHDD 
Figure 3  
High Head Down Display 
Position: 
Direct 
view 
display 
on 
top 
of 
instrument panel. 
Appearance: 
Telltale & warning in text 
(CAMP symbol)
Intensity 
measured 
from eye 
position: 
80 + 80 mcd covered with icon frame 
Size: 
2.0 x 1.0 cm 
Light source: 
2 red back-lighters composed of 16 
LEDs 
Table 2  
High Head Down Display 
characteristics
CLUSTER DISPLAY 
Figure 4  
Cluster Display 
Position: 
Direct view, In instrument cluster
Appearance: 
Telltale & warning in text 
(CAMP symbol)
Intensity 
measured 
from eye 
position: 
80 mcd - covered with icon frame 
Size: 
1.5 x 0.7 cm 
Light source: 
1 red back-lighter composed of 8 
LEDs 
Table 3  
Cluster display characteristics
Downloaded from SAE International by University of Auckland, Saturday, August 04, 2018

--- Page 6 ---
STEERING WHEEL DISPLAY 
Figure 5 
Steering Wheel Display 
Position: 
Direct view, Top centre of steering 
wheel rim 
Appearance: 
Lights 
Intensity 
measured 
from eye 
position: 
80 mcd 
Size: 
26 cm x 0.2 cm 
Light source: 
16 square LEDs grouped as 5, 6 and 
5.   
Table 4 
Steering Wheel Display 
characteristics 
METHOD 
Sixteen experienced drivers aged 24 to 60 years (mean 
age = 37 years) participated in the study.  Nine were 
female and seven were male. 
The study was run in a stationary base driving simulator 
to be able to measure the performance in a controlled 
environment.  Participants were given a five-minute 
practice drive to become familiar with the driving 
simulator. The test drive lasted for approximately 15 
minutes on a motorway.  Participants were instructed to 
drive as they normally would, but to maintain the speed 
limit (110 km/h).  A forward vehicle was cruising at fixed 
distance to the ego vehicle approximating about 1.5 
second’s headway. There was other traffic, but nothing 
that interfered with the driver’s speed. 
During the test drive, participants were presented with 
random targets in four different locations. The targets 
are provided in the following pictures taken from the 
driver position. Figure 6a shows a target in the Centre 
stack display. Figure 6b shows the target in the far left 
of the projected road scene approximating the left mirror 
position. Figure 6c shows the image in the far right 
approximating the right mirror position and finally figure 
6d shows the image in high centre approximating the 
inner rear view mirror position.  The targets were five 
different road signs that appeared in one of the locations 
every four seconds on average.  Drivers were asked to 
respond, with a button press, to the appearance of one 
of five target options (the deer sign).  Target detection 
was rewarded with points. Approximately 12 responses 
per target position were recorded amongst about 225 
total signals.   
Figure 6a 
Centre stack position
Figure 6b 
Left mirror position 
Figure 6c 
Right Mirror position
Downloaded from SAE International by University of Auckland, Saturday, August 04, 2018

--- Page 7 ---
Figure 6d  
Rear view mirror position
The number and frequency of targets were selected to 
create a realistic amount of visual distraction.  FCW 
warning events were distributed where the visual 
warning display would light up and the drivers were 
instructed to press the brake as fast as possible.  A 
warning could only occur 0.5 seconds after a target sign 
was displayed so the driver would be looking at the sign 
when the warning light appeared. The drivers were 
warned every 30 seconds on average with a minimum 
spacing of at least 15 seconds between signals.  The 
drivers brake reaction times to the FCW warnings were 
timed. Approximately 8 responses per warning type 
were recorded.   
All of the reaction time data for both the warnings and 
targets were recorded in a computer log file.  The 
reaction time data for each participant were summarized 
and transcribed into Statistica where they could be 
further analyzed. 
RESULTS 
Repeated measure ANOVAs were conducted on the 
reaction times to the four warning lights.  There were 
significant differences between the warning lights for the 
mean [F(3, 45) = 10.8, p < 0.0001], median [F(3, 45) = 
11.4, p < 0.0001] and maximum [F(3, 45) = 4.28, p < 
0.01] reaction times.  Post-hoc comparisons using 
Tukey's HSD indicated, for these measures, that the 
reaction times were significantly faster for the CWHUD 
than the other three warning displays, figure 7.  This 
difference was nearly 200 ms for the mean brake 
reaction times.  
The standardized effect between the CWHUD and 
Cluster warnings was 0.87, which constitutes a large 
difference. No significant differences were found among 
the other warning lights and there were no gender 
differences in reaction time.  
Figure 7 
Reaction time to warning
Regarding the number of participants who missed a 
warning, only one driver missed a HUD warning, 6 
drivers missed a Steering Wheel warning, 5 missed a 
HHDD warning and 11 missed Cluster warnings.  Some 
people missed more than one warning. The number of 
missed warnings per display distributed as an average 
per driver is shown in figure 8.  The total number of 
missed warnings was as follows: 1 CWHUD, 6 HHDD, 
12 SW and 17 Cluster warnings.  Paired comparisons 
with the Wilcoxon matched pairs test indicated that this 
difference was statistically significant between the 
CWHUD and other warnings (a = 0.05).  
Figure 8 
Missed warnings per warning display 
Repeated measure ANOVAs were conducted on the 
average reaction times to the four target positions.  
There were significant differences between the four 
locations [F(3, 39) = 27.0, p < 0.0001; note two 
Downloaded from SAE International by University of Auckland, Saturday, August 04, 2018

--- Page 8 ---
participants were excluded from this analysis because 
they missed all the targets that appeared on the centre 
stack monitor].  Post-hoc comparisons using Tukey's 
HSD indicated that the reaction times were significantly 
faster for the middle screen targets than the other 3 
locations.  Also the right screen targets had significantly 
faster responses than the left screen position.  
The participants were asked to rank the four warning 
lights according to their preference at the end of their 
drive, see figure 9.  Most preferred the CWHUD warning 
light overall followed closely by the Steering wheel. The 
HHDD was third choice and Cluster warning was the 
least preferred option. 
Figure 9  
Ranking of visual warning display
SOURCES OF ERROR 
Before concluding with some recommendations, some 
limitations of this study should be discussed.  One 
limitation was that the warnings were given during 
'normal' driving rather than collision scenarios (e.g., 
sudden braking vehicle ahead).  This may have 
surprised drivers because they had no indication of 
when the warning would appear.  An opposing problem 
was the test drivers were expecting the warning 
throughout the drive, so they may have responded 
faster than they would have in a real collision-warning 
situation.  On the balance of these factors, it is believed 
that this study obtained a reasonably accurate measure 
of the speed to which distracted drivers react to collision 
warning displays since the results are comparable to the 
CAMP study results1 of 1,18 seconds 85 percentile 
reaction time for a combined HHDD and audible 
warning. The aim of the study was to make an interface 
comparison and not to define the reaction time. For this 
purpose the method is believed to be fully valid. 
The simulator setup with lower environmental brightness 
than 
a 
real 
world 
scenario 
may 
improve 
the 
performance. However the relationship in brake reaction 
time between warning displays may still be similar.  
The driver foot position before warning was not recorded 
in the study. However since all drivers experienced the 
same warnings the distribution of error for different 
drivers foot position should be evenly spread over the 
warning displays. 
Another limitation of this study was that, because the 
four warnings were unique, no conclusions regarding the 
ideal design for a FCW can be made.  For example, 
little can be said about the general effectiveness of 
LED's versus telltales, or high versus low warnings.  The 
study can only say what is best among a limited 
selection of visual warning types rather than what is the 
best possible visual warning for FCW.  
CONCLUSION 
From the results of the performance tests and 
preference ratings, the CWHUD display was in the study 
found to be the best for the FCW.  The average brake 
reaction times were significantly faster for the CWHUD 
warnings (approximately 200 ms). The same result was 
found for the median, minimum and maximum reaction 
times. There were no significant differences in reaction 
times among the other three warnings.  The CWHUD 
also performed best related to low amount of missed 
warnings.  Only one CWHUD warning was missed 
during the experiment, whereas 17 of the total number 
of instrument Cluster warnings were missed by the 
drivers.  Also, the CWHUD rated first among the user 
preferences.  The second, third and fourth choices were 
Steering wheel, HHDD, and Cluster. 
The cluster position had the worst performance and 
preferences ratings.  Also, it was the only warning 
display that was not within 15 degrees of the driver's 
normal site line which is a NHTSA recommendation4.
The explanation for the performance of the CWHUD is 
the greater size and brightness combined with the 
similarity and the position of a red brake light that 
together provide driver with an intuitive understanding of 
the situation.  
Not considered in this study was the problem of driver 
annoyance.  Frequent false alarms or nuisance warnings 
may cause the drivers to become irritated and this risk 
of irritation increases when the warnings are intrusive.  
Further studies preferably in realistic on road driving 
conditions on should be done to ensure that an efficient 
FCW visual display is not too annoying under normal 
realistic operating conditions which include false and 
nuisance alarms. A system utilizing an intrusive type of 
Collision Warning Display is expected to demand less 
nuisance warnings and a very low amount of false 
warnings than a low intrusive Collision Warning system. 
The use of complementary warning modalities can not 
be ruled out as efficient means of warning. I.e. less 
intrusive visual warning signals like the HHDD, Steering 
Wheel Display and Cluster Display used together with 
Downloaded from SAE International by University of Auckland, Saturday, August 04, 2018

--- Page 9 ---
an audible warning can not be ruled out as an efficient 
collision warning. 
Low sunlight may in real life reduce the visibility of the 
warning as well as if the CWHUD warning is outside the 
peripheral 
vision 
of 
the 
driver. 
It is therefore 
recommended 
to combine the CWHUD with a 
complementary warning modality. 
Internal studies on the CWHUD have been performed in 
more realistic FCW scenarios both in simulator and on 
road. These studies show that the proposed CWHUD 
visual warning device is efficient and intuitive in collision 
scenarios. 
To conclude the results shows that the Collision 
Warning Head Up Display, CWHUD, provided the best 
performance in a distracted driver situation based on a 
low amount of missed warnings, low reaction time and 
high driver preference out of the four FCW visual 
displays tested. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The author likes to acknowledge the excellent study 
layout, execution and analysis to Peter Burns and the 
execution of the study to Maria Tevell. 
REFERENCES 
1. Kiefer, R., LeBlanc, D., Palmer, M., Salinger, J., 
Deering, R., & Shulman, M. (1999). CAMP Report: 
Development and validation of functional definitions 
and evaluation procedures for collision warning/ 
avoidance 
systems. 
(DOT 
HS 
808 
964). 
Washington, DC: NHTSA. 
2. Cole, B. L., & Hughes, P. K. (1988). Driver's don't 
search: they just notice. In D. Brogan (Ed.), Visual 
Search,  (pp. 407-417). Durham, U.K.: Taylor & 
Francis. 
3. Lansdown, T.C. (1996) Visual Demand and the 
Introduction 
of 
Advanced 
Driver 
Information 
Systems into Road Vehicles, Doctoral Thesis, 
Loughborough University, Leicestershire. 
4. Lerner, N.D., Kotwal, B.M., Lyons, R.D., & Gardner-
Bonneau, D.J. (1996). Preliminary Human Factors 
Guidelines for Crash Avoidance Devices (DOT HS 
808 342). Washington, DC: NHTSA. 
5. Wang, J. S., Knipling, R. R., & Goodman, M. J. 
(1996). The role of driver inattention in crashes; new 
statistics from the 1995 Crashworthiness Data 
System. Proceedings of 40th Annual meeting of the 
Association for the Advancement of Automotive 
Medicine, Vancouver (October, 1996). 
6. Wickens, C.D. (1992). Engineering Psychology and 
Human Performance. London: Harper-Collins. 
7. Dingus et. al (2006). The 100 car naturalistic driving 
study, Phase 2 - Results of the 100-Car Field 
experiment (DOT HS 810 593). Washington, DC: 
NHTSA. 
CONTACT 
Henrik Lind, Technical Expert 
Volvo Car Corporation 
Safety Electronics 
Dep. 94354 PV4A2 
SE-405 31 Gothenburg 
SWEDEN 
Tel: +46 (31) 595361 
E-mail: hlind1@volvocars.com 
Downloaded from SAE International by University of Auckland, Saturday, August 04, 2018
