--- Page 1 ---
Early warning of pedestrians and cyclists 
 
Joerg Christian Wolf  
Innovation and Engineering Center California 
Volkswagen Group of America, Inc. 
Belmont, CA, United States 
ORCID: 0000-0001-5695-3490 
 
 
Abstract— State-of-the-art motor vehicles are able to break 
for pedestrians in an emergency. We investigate what it would 
take to issue an early warning to the driver so he/she has time 
to react. We have identified that predicting the intention of a 
pedestrian reliably by position is a particularly hard challenge. 
This 
paper 
describes 
an 
early 
pedestrian 
warning 
demonstration system. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
A. Events Until Collision 
If a pedestrian is about to cross the road it can be first 
recognized by his/her body language and most importantly 
his/her head pose [1]. The pedestrian observes the traffic in 
order to make a decision. If an approaching vehicle drives at 
constant speed in an urban scenario, the velocity seems to 
play no role in the decision making [2]. However, it does 
play a role if the driver is slowing down to waive the right of 
way.  This happens very early before the crossing takes 
place. A complex interaction between driver and pedestrian 
takes place here. Schneemann and Gohl [3] has looked into 
detail how the “intention” of crossing can be recognized and 
what influences it. Now the pedestrian starts moving towards 
the curb and is actually stepping onto the road. This can be 
categorized as the “action” phase, see Figure 1. It is possible 
to recognize this by tracking the position of a pedestrian. It 
has been shown that object tracking alone is not sufficient if 
the pedestrian is still on the pavement [2]. However, if the 
pedestrian has not stepped onto the road yet, the reason for 
his trajectory is not always about crossing the road. One can 
easily see that uncertainty and errors increase, the earlier a 
prediction is made. Furthermore, “intention” recognition 
requires the examination of body language and is technically 
more complex than object tracking.  
 
Fig. 1. Events until Collision, a timeline 
In the next chapters we will describe an early warning 
system that relies on detecting the “action” of a pedestrian by 
position tracking. 
B. Combine Camera and navigation, great idea? 
Initially we set out with the hypothesis that combining of 
camera and navigation technology in one system could 
create innovate new ways to guide the driver. A driver 
assistance camera that can detect pedestrians and other 
vehicles can make navigation guidance more context aware. 
We pursued ideas, such as telling the driver to follow a car 
that’s turning and warn for pedestrians and bicycles. Such 
navigation prompts are a more natural user experience [4]. 
This paper describes a combined demonstration system. A 
voice prompt is issued to warn of pedestrians “Watch out for 
the pedestrian on the left”. If a voice prompt was already 
playing or is about to be played the warning was combined 
with the maneuver: “turn right and watch out for bicycle on 
your right”.  
It turns out that navigation guidance information is issued 
well in advance to give the driver time to observe and plan. 
Current driver assistance systems, such as forward collision 
warning (FCW), pedestrian collision warning (PCW), blind 
spot detection (BSD) and lane keep assist (LKA), however, 
give the driver far less time to observe, plan and react. They 
Pedestrian changes body 
posture observes traffic 
Pedestrian estimates vehicle 
speed and vehicle intention 
Pedestrian moving towards the curb 
Pedestrian steps onto the road 
Possible collision 
Emergency breaking warning 
Time 
Early warning 
window 
Uncertainty 
intention 
action 

--- Page 2 ---
operate on information in the immediate vicinity of the 
vehicle. Therefore the user experience concepts for driver 
assistance rely on lights, symbols and sounds rather than 
long voice prompts. 
 
II. SYSTEM SETUP 
An Audi A7 was equipped with an additional automotive 
advanced driver assistance (ADAS) camera. The camera has 
the ability to detect other traffic participants, such as 
vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians. A PC received the 
position of observed objects from the camera via Controller 
Area Network (CAN) bus. Furthermore the wheel speed 
sensors, an accelerometer and gyro are sampled with 200 Hz 
and sent to a PC in the test car. The gyro, accelerometer, 
wheel sensors and a RTK GPS are integrated by Extended 
Kalman Filter in order to estimate the vehicle state. The state 
includes a global vehicle WGS position, yaw, pitch and roll 
as well as velocity. We have used partly external sensors in 
order to gain a more accurate position compared to the 
production vehicle. 
 In order to access the “most probable path” of the 
vehicle the PC requests a route using the HERE Maps 
[HERE ref] cloud routing engine. If the driver diverts from 
the route, a new route is calculated. The PC can also generate 
maneuver voice prompts, essentially forming a mini 
navigation system.  
 
 
Fig. 2. System Overview 
 
We have developed various visualizations of the 
observed data and vehicle including real-time satellite map 
overlay, an Android App with integrated HERE map, and a 
EB Assist ADTF (Automotive Data and Time-Triggered 
Framework)  [adtf ref] rendered display. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Vehicle and positioning uncertainty at the bottom in a satellite 
image. At the top of the image is a stiched wide-angle camera image for 
recording with projected driver assistance camera detections. 
 
 
III. ACTION PREDICTION 
A. Algorithm 
When a pedestrian appears in the camera his/her position 
is tracked at 36 samples a second to make “action” 
predictions of where the pedestrian is planning to go. The 
observed scene is transformed so that the vehicle faces the 
+x axis, using the vehicles initial heading. This allows for the 
pedestrian’s longitudinal and lateral movement with respect 
to the vehicle to be analyzed on separate axes. A linear 
regression is applied to each axis with respect to time. 

ŷlat(t)β0latt + β1lat 


ŷlong(t)β0longt + β1long 


Accel. 
Wheels 
GPS 
Kalman 
Filter 
Mini Navi 
Warning 
software 
HERE 
grabber 
Wide-angle 
Cameras 
PC 
Jetson 
Audio 
Pos 
route 
ADAS camera 
Gyro 

--- Page 3 ---
 
 
Fig. 4. vehicle moving longitudinal along x axis 
 
A minimum number of samples is necessary to predict 
the pedestrian’s motion. A monocular camera, can measure 
lateral positions much more accurately than longitudinal 
positions because it projects objects onto a assumed ground 
plane. Therefore lateral movement are calculated with a 
minimum of 12 samples (~333ms) while longitudinal 
movement require 30 samples (~833ms). 
  
Having established a model for the pedestrian’s motion it 
can be checked where the pedestrian’s path is intersecting 
with the vehicles most probable path. Each pedestrian’s 
interception point and time until interception is found by 
comparing the pedestrian’s estimated trajectory with the 
vehicle’s route. If the time until interception is less than 4 
seconds and the interception point is at most 60 meters ahead 
of the vehicles’s current position, then a warning is 
generated. 
 
If the pedestrian is observed briefly before exiting the 
field of view (e.g. behind another car or the driver has passed 
by) and there are enough samples to estimate its trajectory, 
then the algorithm will continue to predict the pedestrian’s 
location using its estimated trajectory for 4 seconds. 
 
Pedestrian warnings provide directionality (“left”, 
“right”, “ahead”) by estimating the pedestrian’s position in 
the time it takes to hear the warning prompt. For example, if 
the warning prompt takes 1 second to read and a pedestrian 
crossing from left to right will be directly in front of the 
vehicle in 1 second then the algorithm will use “ahead”.  
 
We consider a warning as “early” if it can be issued at 
least 3 seconds before the emergency warning. 
B. Example Data 
 
The following six figures illustrate pedestrian trajectories 
using data from the ADAS camera at different distances and 
vehicle speeds. In the first three figures, the vehicle is 
stationary at (0,0) facing the +x direction. In the second 
three, the vehicle is driving at 15mph in the +x direction 
starting at (0,0). In all six figures, the pedestrian is walking 
in the +y direction at x=20, 30 or 40 meters. A wide road and 
slow speed was chosen to give enough time to track the 
pedestrian through the complete field of view. This enabled 
us to investigate the tracking performance. We also 
conducted many test drives around urban and suburban 
towns whereby observed pedestrian would usually only have 
a track of 2-3 meters length.  
 
 
Fig. 5. Stationary vehicle at (0,0) pedestrian passes in +y direction 
 
 
Fig. 6. Stationary vehicle at (0,0) pedestrian passes in +y direction, ground 
truth distance is 40 meters. 
 
Fig. 7. Moving vehicle, motion compensated coordinates, pedestrian 
passes in +y direction 

--- Page 4 ---
 
Fig. 8. Moving vehicle, motion compensated coordinates, pedestrian 
passes in +y direction , ground truth distance is 40 meters and is reducing 
as the vehicle gets closer. 
 
The dot on each line marks the 30th sample of data. For 
almost every trajectory there is not enough position data up 
to the 30th sample to accurately estimate the direction in 
which the pedestrian is moving. 
 
In each experiment with a stationary car the pedestrian 
trajectory is roughly linear. As expected, the start and end of 
each trajectory have the most noise while the center is the 
closest to the true position of the pedestrian (20, 30, and 40 
meters, respectively). When the vehicle is moving, the 
ADAS camera struggles to locate the pedestrian. Figure 6 
and figure 7 show that the ADAS camera both has trouble 
finding the initial position of the pedestrian and has a 
tendency to overcorrect for the motion of the car. As the car 
gets closer to the pedestrian, the position estimate gets more 
accurate until it converges on the true pedestrian position 
right before the pedestrian exists the camera field of view 
(FOV). This creates a sideways bell shaped curve. In figure 
8, the ADAS camera’s overcorrection is so severe that it 
creates a discontinuity in the trajectory. 
 
It also occasionally loses track of pedestrians for a 
few milliseconds and then reclassifies them with a new ID. 
One pedestrian can therefore appear to be two or more 
because their trajectory is disjoint. In figure 8 the red disjoint 
trajectory is a single pedestrian. Each piece of the trajectory 
is relatively linear and mutually orthogonal. While there are 
some disjoint trajectories that can be merged with reasonable 
confidence, figure 8 shows that merging disjoint trajectories 
is not always possible. [5] has applied a particle filter to 
smooth the path of a tracked pedestrian. They reported that a 
change of one pixel can make the position jump several 
meters.  
It is possible to consider a more complex model for the 
motion of a pedestrian and the car. A pedestrian never moves 
faster than a jogging pace and they are more likely to cross a 
street at an intersection. Since pedestrians move at walking 
speed then a max speed can be used to prevent erroneous 
trajectories calculated from data with a large amount of 
longitudinal error. [6] used Recursive Bayesian Filters which 
is a promising alternative. 
Using this algorithm the system can distinguish between 
pedestrians walking along the pavement in longitudinal 
direction and pedestrians that are crossing and are from the 
timing in a collision course. The algorithm also works for 
bicycles. Most bicyclists are easy to monitor in low 
resolution ADAS cameras and can give correct trajectory 
estimations. 
 
IV. DISCUSSION 
 
A. Tracking Performance 
To deliver a meaningful warning to the driver, the 
intention/action of pedestrians must be detected long before a 
potential collision. Pedestrian “action” is deduced primarily 
from their velocity. The camera however is very limited in 
its ability to track pedestrians and provide pedestrian position 
updates. 
 
The most challenging problem is that current ADAS 
cameras typically have only a 40 degree FOV and are poor at 
estimating longitudinal distance of small objects. Its small 
FOV limits the number of pedestrian position samples before 
a potential collision and its ability to estimate longitudinal 
distance degrades with both true pedestrian distance and 
vehicle speed. Far more than 30 samples are typically needed 
to accurately estimate longitudinal movement. However, in 
most test drives, waiting for over 30 samples before warning 
about a pedestrian walking longitudinally took too long to be 
useful for an early warning. 
 
Unlike longitudinal movement, lateral movement is 
much easier to detect. In most test drives, 12 samples were 
enough to accurately estimate lateral movement. 
[7] argues that cameras still need to improve on stability, 
accuracy and range in order to reliably track the position of 
pedestrians. Currently it’s only possible to get a limited field 
of view and far range or vice versa. We can confirm this with 
this experiment. It’s not possible to reliably tell the direction 
in that a pedestrian is going using a camera, see figure 8. 
Even more challenging is to recognize the head pose at 
range. For example [1] from another OEM argues that at the 
head needs to be at least 25 px width, which would require a 
12 Mega-Pixel camera at a 40 degrees field of view to reach 
a 40m range. 
 
B. User experience evaluation 
Playing voice prompts had two mayor drawbacks: 
Firstly, if another prompt was already playing it delayed the 
warning. Secondly, if route guidance is not running it did not 
provide a coherent user experience with other driver 
assistance systems for pedestrians, which only make a 
warning sound. We now believe the user experience of the 
warning should be consistent with the HMI user experience 
of a pedestrian collision warning but should sound not so 
intense or urgent. We have considered playing the sound 
from the direction the threat is coming from. 

--- Page 5 ---
 
V. OPPORTUNITIES FOR FUTURE WORK 
 
 
The pedestrian’s intent to cross can be partly determined 
on their location on the sidewalk. We observed from videos 
that only when the pedestrian is actually stepping from the 
pavement onto the road we can be sure he/she is trying to 
cross. This was not implemented in our test system, however 
it is technically feasible to use camera recognized lanes or 
HD map border geometry to determine when a pedestrian 
steps into a road.  
Additionally, the driver’s intent can be derived from the 
car’s position data and if the driver has the foot on the 
breaks/accelerator. If the car slows down or is stationary it’s 
possible that warnings aren’t necessary. This would be 
another low-hanging fruit. 
 
As seen in figure 1, we assume that uncertainty decreases 
as the pedestrian takes action and steps onto the road. We 
believe the best approach is a combination of intention 
recognition at first, i.e. head direction, etc. and then waiting 
for the action. This can be fused into a Bayesian statistical 
model, such as a hidden markov model or related. See for 
example the work from Kooji, et .al. [8]. 
 
We see potential that an “intention” recognition system 
based on a camera that is fused with an “action” recognition 
system that tracks movement with LIDAR/Radar can reduce 
uncertainty and make early warnings possible. 
 
  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Horst Kloeden, Nina Brouwer, Stefan Ries, Ralph H. Rasshofer 
"Potenzial der Kopfposenerkennung zur Absichtsvorhersage von 
Fußgaengern 
im 
urbanen 
Verkehr", 
9. 
Workshop 
Fahrerassistenzsysteme, FAS2014 Walting im Altmuehltal, pp. 70-80 
2014 
[2] S. Schmidt and B. Faerber, Pedestrians at the kerb - Recognising the 
action intentions of humans, Transportation Research Part F: Traffic 
Psychology and Behaviour, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 300-310, Jul 2009 
[3] Friederike Schneemann and Irene Gohl, "Analyzing Driver-
Pedestrian Interaction at Crosswalks: A Contribution to Autonomous 
Driving in Urban Environments", 2016 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles 
Symposium (IV), Gothenburg, Sweden, June 19-22, 2016 
[4] W. Gale and J. Mays “Dynamic natural guidance”, US Patent 
US10325489B2 
[5] Andreas Møgelmose, Mohan M. Trivedi and Thomas B. Moeslund, 
"Trajectory Analysis and Prediction for Improved Pedestrian Safety: 
Integrated Framework and Evaluations" IEEE Intelligent Vehicles 
Symposium (IV) , June 28 - July 1, 2015. COEX, Seoul, Korea, 2015 
[6] N. Schneider and D.M. Gavrila. Pedestrian Path Prediction with 
Recursive Bayesian Filters: A Comparative Study. Proc. German 
Conf. on Patt. Recognition 2013 
[7] Benjamin Voelz, Holger Mielenz, Gabriel Agamennoni and Roland 
Siegwart, "Feature Relevance Estimation for Learning Pedestrian 
Behavior at Crosswalks" IEEE 18th International Conference on 
Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2015 
[8] Julian Francisco Pieter Kooij, Nicolas Schneider, Fabian Flohr and 
Dariu M. Gavrila,"Context-Based Pedestrian Path Prediction", D. 
Fleet et al. (Eds.): ECCV 2014, Part VI, LNCS 8694, pp. 618–
633,Springer, 2014 
[9] https://www.here.com/products/location-based-services 
[10] https://www.elektrobit.com/products/automated-driving/eb-
assist/adtf/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
