--- Page 1 ---
sustainability
Review
Negotiation and Decision-Making for a Pedestrian
Roadway Crossing: A Literature Review
Roja Ezzati Amini 1,*
, Christos Katrakazas 2 and Constantinos Antoniou 1
1
Chair of Transportation Systems Engineering, Department of Civil, Geo and Environmental Engineering,
Technical University of Munich, 85748 Munich, Germany; c.antoniou@tum.de
2
Department of Transportation Planning and Engineering, National Technical University of Athens,
15773 Athens, Greece; ckatrakazas@mail.ntua.gr
*
Correspondence: roja.ezzati@tum.de
Received: 2 October 2019; Accepted: 20 November 2019; Published: 27 November 2019


Abstract: The interaction among pedestrians and human drivers is a complicated process, in which
road users have to communicate their intentions, as well as understand and anticipate the actions of
users in their vicinity. However, road users still ought to have a proper interpretation of each others’
behaviors, when approaching and crossing the road. Pedestrians, as one of the interactive agents,
demonstrate different behaviors at road crossings, which do not follow a consistent pattern and may
vary from one situation to another. The presented inconsistency and unpredictability of pedestrian
road crossing behaviors may thus become a challenge for the design of emerging technologies in
the near future, such as automated driving system (ADS). As a result, the current paper aims at
understanding the effectual communication techniques, as well as the factors inﬂuencing pedestrian
negotiation and decision-making process. After reviewing the state-of-the-art and identifying research
gaps with regards to vehicle–pedestrian crossing encounters, a holistic approach for road crossing
interaction modeling is presented and discussed. It is envisioned that the presented holistic approach
will result in enhanced safety, sustainability, and effectiveness of pedestrian road crossings.
Keywords: pedestrian behavior; vehicle–pedestrian interactions; road crossing; decision-making
process
1. Introduction
Participating in trafﬁc requires road users to continuously interact with one another [1]. During the
time spent for transport, trafﬁc participants have to face a great amount of information and react
efﬁciently to it [1–3]. In such a system, it is essential for road participants to manage their own
moves, while taking into account the presence of other users, as all of the participants usually share
a pre-deﬁned space [1]. These mobile encounters entail a continual monitoring and communicating of
users’ positions with regards to one another, along with suitable reactions to the features associated
with the surroundings [4]. Furthermore, trafﬁc safety in urban settings heavily depends on successful
interactions among trafﬁc participants [5]. For this reason, fundamental trafﬁc rules have been
established to manage trafﬁc, especially in vehicle–pedestrian encounters. The trafﬁc management and
control systems can diminish the conﬂicts and uncertainty by specifying the right of way for different
road users (e.g., trafﬁc rules imposed by different phases of trafﬁc signals at signalized intersections).
Road trafﬁc, however, involves many circumstances for which it may not be possible to specify explicit
rules [6], such as a sudden change of direction by pedestrian, while crossing the road. Hence, trafﬁc
participants and particularly pedestrians extensively rely on communication methods, elaborated
over the course of time amongst them, to avoid conﬂict and solve ambiguous trafﬁc situations [7].
For instance, hand gestures by drivers to convey the message “it is safe to cross” to pedestrians,
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713; doi:10.3390/su11236713
www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability

--- Page 2 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
2 of 24
while there is no trafﬁc control systems on the road segment. The role of these communication cues
is dominant in situations in which the right of way is not clearly deﬁned [8], or road users expose
unexpected trafﬁc behaviors [9]. In these circumstances, road users employ explicit and implicit
signals to communicate their intention regarding either gaining or giving the priority in the crossing
scenarios. However, sometimes pedestrians are engaged in multi-tasking (such as mobile-phone
conversation, texting, listening to music, reading), and are therefore not able to communicate their
movements/intentions with the interacting party. Such behaviors have not been captured in this paper,
as the focus is on trafﬁc interactions as a bilateral process among involved road users. In addition to
communicating intended movements, trafﬁc interactions require road users to properly interpret and
predict the actions of their interactive party. However, this may become problematic in some situations
since trafﬁc participants demonstrate different behaviors on approaching the crossing sites. Previous
studies have investigated a broad range of factors that may affect the behaviors of road users, namely
drivers and pedestrians, on approaching the crossing sites, such as pedestrian walking speed and
characteristics, speed of approaching vehicle, road characteristics, etc. [10–14].
Moreover, mobility technologies have been constantly changing in the recent years, as more and
more vehicles will have automation functions in the imminent future [15]. The changes of transportation
means have inevitably led to an adjustment of road designs, and a new set of rules and social norms
emerging to manage the mobility of traffic participants [16]. Since fully automated vehicles will be
integrated into the existing transportation system, the interaction with pedestrians becomes challenging
in cooperative situations (e.g., when road users require sharing their intentions to communicate the
right of way, or to coordinate their reactions) [5,17–21]. This is primarily related to the absence of
a human driver in vehicles and thereby an absence of driver cues in vehicle–pedestrian communications,
which may decline the trust and confidence of pedestrians [22–25]. To overcome these limitations,
the intentions of such vehicles need to be clearly transmitted to other traffic participants [24]. In addition,
ADS must have a proper understanding of pedestrians’ behaviors and their decision-making strategies
to execute appropriate driving maneuvers [8]. The complexity of crossing strategies performed by
pedestrians, and difficulty to thoroughly analyze their decision-making process, have also engendered
challenges in designing ADS [5,8], insomuch that human road users may act differently from the
system’s presumptions [16].
The main focus of this paper, therefore, is to review the previous findings of crossing behavior
studies in order to investigate how pedestrians negotiate the road crossing with motorized vehicles
and make decisions at crossing sites, in which the right of way is not determined by formal traffic rules
or road designs. A proper understanding of these matters can provide useful recommendations for
designing the ADS, and ensuring a safe, smooth, and efficacious interaction process amongst pedestrians
and vehicles [5]. The paper is intended to provide in-depth insights into the following issues:
1.
The efﬁciency of different communication techniques and their impact on behavior of road users
have been investigated thoroughly in this paper by reviewing previous studies. How road users
react to various communication signals, how a signal is interpreted by receiver, which methods
road users choose to communicate their intentions, and how they send the signal are substantial
components of trafﬁc communications. An in-depth examination of these elements can assist
ADS in forming efﬁcient communication methods with pedestrians.
2.
Factors inﬂuencing crossing behaviors of pedestrians have been reviewed in order to understand
why pedestrians behave differently from one situation to another while crossing the roadway.
Since understanding of pedestrians’ behaviors is not intuitive [7], a comprehensive analysis of
decision-making procedure and factors inﬂuencing them is required for the design of ADS [17].
3.
The vehicle–pedestrian interaction process includes movements/intentions communications, as
well as decision-making processes of interactive parties which are reﬂected in their crossing
behaviors.
A vast number of studies have been performed to assess different aspects of
vehicle–pedestrian interactions; however, the focus on the entire process has been mostly
disregarded due to the complexity of the subject. This is crucial as ADS requires an appropriate

--- Page 3 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
3 of 24
interaction concept for driving safely in urban environments [5]. Therefore, formulating the
whole interaction process in the existing trafﬁc context, by considering the role of different
communication methods and users’ crossing strategies, is vital for designing efﬁcient ADS and
external human–machine interfaces (eHMIs).
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 includes the fundamental deﬁnitions, while Section 3
provides an overview of the potential conﬂict points of pedestrians with vehicular trafﬁc.
The interactive parties in various crossing scenarios, presently only human road users, interact
with one another by a variety of verbal and nonverbal communication means.
These trafﬁc
communication methods used by road users on approaching the crossing sites are reviewed in Section 4.
The employment of different cues and their impact on the yielding behaviors were also investigated
in this section. In what follows, previous studies of crossing behaviors at unmarked/unsignalized
crossing sites are reviewed. For this purpose, the behavior of drivers and pedestrians on approaching
different uncontrolled pedestrian crossing facilities has been explored in Section 5, to identify factors
inﬂuencing their crossing-decision strategies.
2. Deﬁnitions
Trafﬁc Conﬂict is deﬁned as an event between trafﬁc participants, in which an evasive maneuver
needs to be taken by one of them to avoid a collision [26].
Jaywalking is a term used to describe the action of crossing a road with no regard to the
pedestrians’ trafﬁc regulations [27].
Trafﬁc Interaction is deﬁned as situations in which the trafﬁc participants adapt their behaviors
according to one another [28], as well as interpreting the environmental context, surrounding trafﬁc,
and responses to one’s own behavior [29,30].
Pedestrian Gap Acceptance (GA) refers to the time or space gap between vehicle and
pedestrians [31], and can be determined based on the speed of oncoming vehicles, as well as its
distance from the pedestrian crossing [11].
Post-Encroachment-Time (PET) value can be used to describe the time gap, from the moment
that one of the interacting road users leaves the potential collision point to the moment another user
arrives at it [32].
Time-To-Collision (TTC) value is the time between approaching road users and the potential
collision point [33], and can be used to describe the severity of conﬂict events [32].
Time-To-Arrival (TTA) estimation can be used to evaluate the time gap perception between
approaching vehicles and the own position/a person/speciﬁc place [10,34].
Time Advantage (TAdv) as an indicator describes the expected PET value for each moment,
considering an unchanged speed and paths of road users [35].
3. Vehicle-Pedestrian Safety Considerations
Most vehicle–pedestrian collisions occur when pedestrians cross the roadway illegally at locations
out of crosswalks, or at pedestrian crossing facilities particularly with lower protection [36–39].
Trafﬁc participants may not comply with formal trafﬁc laws for reasons, such as lack of sufﬁcient
knowledge about the rules in speciﬁc situations or the ambiguity of rules, which may be understood
differently by users [40,41]. Some of the trafﬁc rules may also not perfectly correspond to the road
design or the natural human behavior patterns [40]. Dey and Terken [42] claimed that the lack of strict
enforcement like trafﬁc lights at uncontrolled pedestrian crossings may result in disregarding users’
right of way by drivers. In a similar manner, in the absence of crossing facilities in a road segment,
pedestrians may adapt mid-block crossing and jaywalking, in order to avoid detour and shorten the
travel time (instead of walking an additional distance to a crosswalk) [42–45]. Such unpredictable
crossing behaviors by pedestrians create a potential critical conﬂict with approaching vehicles, as well
as interrupting the normal trafﬁc ﬂow [46]. However, the majority of road users interact without

--- Page 4 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
4 of 24
any serious conﬂict and are therefore of little/no interest from a trafﬁc safety point of view [16].
The interactions may be important from the user experience perspective, which may result in
unpleasant interaction experience, and therefore encouraging/discouraging speciﬁc behaviors or road
designs [16]. In addition, pedestrians are notiﬁed of the spots to cross the road by marked crosswalks
and signs, but there is still no standard agreement for them to indicate their crossing decision intention
in advance of drivers, besides standing in/at the crosswalk [47]. However, pedestrians stepping into the
roadway, or signs and markings may induce drivers to give way to pedestrians at crossings, but there
is still no effectual and certain prompt that a pedestrian, who has commenced crossing, can use to
enhance the possibility of a driver yielding [47–49], since there are still some situations in which drivers
do not give way to pedestrians who stepped into the street. For instance, an observation study on zebra
crossings showed that about 30% of pedestrians continued walking when the vehicle was approaching,
and the vehicle took the evasive action to avoid collision [13], whereas, in 4% of the situations,
the pedestrians either retreated or ran from the path of the vehicle to avoid collision [13]. Occurrence
of the aforementioned scenarios signiﬁes the necessity for utilizing some additional techniques by
road users to communicate their movement intentions in advance of the interacting party. Therefore,
a variety of communication methods, which are mostly based on the human communication principles,
have been developed between human road users in order to avoid conﬂict and resolve ambiguity
regarding the right of way.
4. Communication between Trafﬁc Participants
Communication is an essential element of trafﬁc interactions, as it assists human users with
resolving ambiguous circumstances on the road [50]. Trafﬁc participants communicate a range of
actions regarding their intended movement, such as going straight, stopping, and going ahead
of someone [51]. For an efﬁcient communication, the interacting parties need to understand the
intentions of one another, as well as the situation in which the communication is occurring [52]. Since
it varies from one situation to another and it always depends on the circumstances [21], this also
requires communicators to anticipate each other’s future actions [7,21,52]. However, anticipations
and expectations concerning the other’s behavior may not always be correct [53]. The situation may
also become problematic when trafﬁc participants behave according to contradictory formal and
informal trafﬁc rules, in which the trafﬁc participant’s ability to rightly anticipate another user’s
behavior declines [53,54]. Trafﬁc interactions are also relatively short, which limits the opportunities
to communicate among trafﬁc participants [37]. This may oftentimes lead to misunderstanding and
misinterpretations and thus annoyance amongst participants [37]. Furthermore, the need for social
interaction among drivers, cyclists, and pedestrians is more substantial in urban trafﬁc [50], and mostly
occurs in the front and the side of the car [25]. The actions employed by interactive parties to convey
their movement intentions can be classiﬁed as different communication methods, as discussed in the
following subsections.
4.1. Anticipatory Behaviors of Trafﬁc Participants
Anticipatory behaviors are minor activities performed by road users that make others able
to predict their intentions [6]. Examples of such behaviors include changes in walking speed or
placing a foot on the road, which in general helps drivers to anticipate a potential crossing intention
for a pedestrian [6,10]. These behaviors are classiﬁed as one of the informal and non-regulated
communication methods among road users to anticipate what action another user may possibly do [10].
Another anticipation of trafﬁc participant’s behavior is associated with the physical characteristics
of communicators. This communication signal is the same as what is named “schema formation”
by Merten [55] in grouping different communication choices.
For instance, the physical traits
of pedestrians can give drivers clues about their age and their mobility behaviors, while elderly
pedestrians may walk slower than younger ones [6], or children may have more unpredictable
behaviors than adults. Pedestrians can also utilize the same available information on the road about

--- Page 5 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
5 of 24
the vehicle’s model/category, e.g., the driver of an ambulance may behave differently from a van
driver [6].
4.2. Human Driver Communication Methods in Interaction with Pedestrians
Drivers anticipate the intentions of other road users by interpreting various nonverbal
communication cues. This is mostly presented among drivers and pedestrians, while negotiating right
of way [20]. Although the decisions of drivers are affected by the trafﬁc regulations on the road, there
is still some uncertainty in circumstances, where the trafﬁc laws are not sufﬁcient [56]. These situations
can occur at uncontrolled intersections, transition of trafﬁc signals, merging/changing lane, multi-lane
roundabouts, etc. [56]. From the vehicle’s point of view, communication style can be classiﬁed as
implicit and explicit [12,21]. These terms are deﬁned below:
•
Implicit Communication (also referred as informal communication): In general, when the content
of a message is indirectly included in that instead of clearly being stated, then the message is
conveyed implicitly [21]. In terms of trafﬁc, implicit communication refers to using non-regulated
communication cues to negotiate the driver’s intention, or to help communicators to anticipate
future actions of them, e.g., deceleration to encourage the pedestrian to cross [10,21,57].
•
Explicit Communication (also referred as formal communication): A message is transmitted
explicitly, if the sender transfers intention directly to the receiver by using clear cues [21].
In trafﬁc situations, explicit communication usually refers to using light and sound signals to
communicate the intention of vehicles [21]. Explicit communication includes deﬁned/regulated
communication means. Horn, turn indicator, emergency lights, warning lights, brake lights,
and even labelling a car (as an ambulance, automated vehicle, police, etc.) are examples of
this type of communication [6,21,53]. Nonverbal behaviors are usually used to transfer implicit
messages; however, in trafﬁc, nonverbal communication methods are used for sending explicit
messages [58,59]. Hand gestures executed by drivers to signal pedestrians that they can cross in
front of the car safely, or expression of gratitude to a fellow driver by waving a hand are examples
of explicit cues performed by drivers in trafﬁc encounter [6].
4.3. Pedestrians Communication Methods in Interaction with Drivers
Pedestrians mainly interact with other road users by using nonverbal communication signals.
However, in some situations, the message transferred via nonverbal cues is missed, ignored, or not
correctly comprehended by the interacting party [60]. The main nonverbal communication signals
used by pedestrians are:
•
Gaze Direction: The most signiﬁcant message that is essential to be transferred to pedestrians
is whether they have been seen [6]. Therefore, in the crossing scenes, they mostly establish eye
contact with drivers or wait to receive an explicit cue from them to conﬁrm that they have been
detected, and the driver will yield if they start crossing [6,61,62]. If the driver who receives the
signal returns the eye contact, then pedestrians presume that they have been seen [63]. Moreover,
head orientation, which occurs with the purpose of looking or glancing at the approaching trafﬁc,
can be a robust sign of crossing intentions by pedestrians [64]. However, trafﬁc participants
behave differently in the various trafﬁc settings [64]. For example, pedestrians intending to
cross a road are more likely to cross without looking at the oncoming trafﬁc in the presence of
trafﬁc signals and stop signs, since they expect drivers to obey the trafﬁc rules [64], whereas,
in the absence of trafﬁc regulations, they frequently monitor the approaching trafﬁc and mostly
establish eye contact with the driver to assess the environment and whether the driver may give
way [64,65].
•
Hand Gesturing: Gestures are described as efﬁcient nonverbal signals amongst road users, which
are mostly interpretable and explicit [6,66]. However, the concept of the message transferred
by using this kind of signals can vary from situation to situation. For example, hand gesturing

--- Page 6 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
6 of 24
can show thankfulness, giving priority, or requesting the right of way, while the responses are
in the form of changes in pedestrian behavior like deceleration, acceleration, or stop [64,67,68].
According to previous studies of driver’s interaction with the environment, three fundamental
dimensions have been deﬁned to evaluate a signal: visibility, clarity, and motive power [66,69].
From the visibility point of view, gesturing a dynamic signal is found to stand out more than
trafﬁc signs and road markings, since driver’s attention is more easily caught by moving rather
than static objects [70]. Clarity, on the other hand, varies across gestures, as some are more
effective than others. Finally, driver compliance may vary according to the concept of the gestures,
i.e., whether they are commanding or polite [66]. This can reﬂect compliance obtaining strategies
through “assertion” and “direct request” [66,71].
4.4. The Impact of Communication between Road Users on Trafﬁc Behaviors
Road users communicate with each other through various unregulated methods, which include
their movements and positioning, as well as establishing eye contact. According to previous studies,
these interactions have a vital role in forming a smooth and efﬁcient trafﬁc ﬂow, as well as improving
safety [7,21,25,50,72,73]. Road trafﬁc is fundamentally directed by a range of ofﬁcial regulations,
which deﬁne the right of way for trafﬁc participants in various road designs and facilitate social
interaction [37]. Furthermore, in many countries, drivers give way to pedestrians to protect them
at pedestrian crossings or unregulated crosswalks [66]. However, drivers may be more likely to
conform with the ofﬁcial trafﬁc control regulations rather than gesturing or gazing cues displayed by
pedestrians [74]. Road users, particularly drivers, may also receive informal communication signals
from authorized trafﬁc directors, which is mostly by means of hand gesturing [75]. On the other
hand, pedestrians may employ nonverbal communication indicators only when an expected driving
behavior of an oncoming vehicle has been contravened [42]. In these situations, pedestrians are
looking for a conﬁrmation of intent from the drivers before carrying out their crossing decisions [42],
while most drivers give way to pedestrians who have already stepped into the street, but there are
still some drivers who ignore the pedestrian’s right of way, and speed up or swerve to pass them
at crossings sites [76]. For example, an observation on Columbus, Ohio showed that the majority of
drivers never came to a complete stop, and 43% of them did not stop with pedestrians walking in
the crosswalk [76]. Another study revealed that more than a third of drivers (36%) failed to yield to
pedestrians at uncontrolled marked crossings [53].
In the process of negotiating priority in driver–pedestrian interactions, either pedestrian or driver
has to give way. Pedestrians give way to drivers by making the roadway clear for them to cross
by, for example, waiting at the curb or stepping out of the road. On the other hand, a driver yields
by; (1) a reasonable complete stop (hard yield), (2) delaying vehicle arrival at the crosswalk enough
to create a crossing opportunity for the pedestrian (rolling/soft yield), and (3) slowing down and
eventually stopping for an extended duration before restarting movement (hard yield and stop) [46,48].
In hard-yield conditions, the driver is usually too close to the crosswalk during a crossing activity
and must stop momentarily, while soft-yield is a condition based on the driver’s observations and
anticipations of pedestrian action [46]. On the other hand, pedestrians cross the roadway ﬁrst in
three circumstances: (1) before the arrival of the vehicle and without inﬂuencing its speed, (2) when
the oncoming car is motivated to stop by a pedestrian who does not stop before crossing, and (3)
when the approaching vehicle brakes on the driver’s own initiative to yield to pedestrian (ideal
situations) [32]. Such [37] classiﬁed eye contact as a means of communication for both drivers and
pedestrians at crosswalks considered by pedestrians when deciding to wait/go, and by drivers as a way
to force pedestrians to stop. A study to assess the inﬂuence of pedestrian’s gaze on driver’s yielding
behavior at pedestrian crosswalk showed that gazing increased the number of drivers who gave way
to pedestrians [77,78]. In contrast, another research paper indicated that nonverbal communication
signals, such as eye contact and gestures, do not play a signiﬁcant role in crossing negotiation [42].
Another experimental study criticized the possibility of performing mutual eye contact between

--- Page 7 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
7 of 24
pedestrians and drivers [79]. The results showed that over 90% of the participants cannot determine
the gaze of the driver at 15 m and see the driver at all at 30 m. The authors then argued that, considering
the speed limit of 25 mph in urban settings, more than 99% of pedestrians would have begun crossing,
before being able to see either the driver or the driver’s gaze. An experimental study performed in
Beijing, China evaluated the impact of various pedestrian hand gesturing on driver yielding rate at
non-signalized crossings, which showed a slight increase in the overall yielding rate among drivers
when pedestrians performed hand gestures [66]. The same study in the US also showed greater yielding
rates at uncontrolled marked crossings when pedestrians displayed hand gestures, compared with
not using hand movements [47]. Most of these informal trafﬁc rules and communication methods are
developed through trafﬁc participants’ interactions, and based on expectations about other participants’
behavior, mostly when formal trafﬁc rules do not correspond with the road design [40]. The expectation
about the behaviors of other interacting agents can be formed due to the chosen strategies or transferred
communication signals. However, the interaction strategies executed by road users may be inﬂuenced
by various factors, such as interaction environment or road users’ characteristics, and need to be
correctly interpreted.
5. Crossing Behaviors of Trafﬁc Participants
Trafﬁc participants manifest varied behaviors on approaching a crossing site. Drivers, as a party
in the interaction with pedestrians, have several strategies to decide whether or not to give way
to pedestrians.
These strategies are subject to several factors, such as speed of the vehicle on
approach, or its distance to the common spatial zone with pedestrians. Zaidel [80] discussed that
every driver is inﬂuenced by social environment factors, including other trafﬁc participants, general
social norms, and formal trafﬁc rules. Every trafﬁc participant is also a part of other participants’ social
environments [80]. Social environment can inﬂuence drivers in four different ways: (1) communication
with other participants, (2) behaviors of other participants as a source of information, (3) other
participants as a reference group, and (4) emulation of others. Another common strategy utilized by
drivers to coordinate their behavior is “movement pattern”, showing how road users communicate
their intentions through their movements [81]. For example, on approaching crosswalks, drivers
stop before where they legally must, signaling their intent to wait for others to take the right of way.
Then, they move forward slowly to indicate that they will take the right of way next [81]. In addition,
the meaning of road users’ actions can only be comprehended in the context of their occurrence [81,82].
Therefore, the meaning of the actions of a single road user cannot be understood by looking at the
actions alone, and must be interpreted by considering the whole road system, containing road users,
road geometry, etc. [81,82].
On the other hand, it is important to understand under which circumstances pedestrians feel
safe to cross, and which factors inﬂuence their crossing-decision strategies. Pedestrian crossing
behaviors are oftentimes accompanied by some sort of signals and information to indicate their
crossing intentions to the approaching vehicle, such as forward movement, stepping into the road,
leaning forward, putting one foot on the road, looking at oncoming vehicle, informal signals, etc. [81].
Distance between agents, as a result of movement, also inﬂuences pedestrians’ expectations regarding
the other trafﬁc participants’ behavior [83]. In addition, pedestrians cross the roadway in different
ways, based on the speed of oncoming vehicles, available gaps, and number of lanes: (1) single
stage, (2) two stage, (3) and rolling [43]. Pedestrian crossing behavior can also be classiﬁed into three
phases: (1) approaching (without changing the walking speed), (2) appraising (decelerating due to the
speed and distance of approaching vehicles), (3) and crossing (acceleration) [84]. It is also possible
for a pedestrian to step backwards or run to avoid collision with vehicles, when the gap is not long
enough to complete the crossing [36]. However, the majority of pedestrians waits before crossing,
until the vehicles come to a complete stop, instead of relying on their own perception of whether it is
safe to cross [53]. The factors, identiﬁed in the literature, inﬂuencing the crossing behaviors of users
are presented next:

--- Page 8 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
8 of 24
5.1. Pedestrian-Associated Factors Inﬂuencing Crossing Behaviors
5.1.1. Pedestrian Characteristics
Age is one of the factors inﬂuencing pedestrian behavior, meaning that people of different age
groups may have various crossing behaviors. Road crossing is a challenging cognitive task, which
makes safe trafﬁc judgements difﬁcult for children younger than 9 years old. It may even take until the
age of 11 or 12 for children to fully develop all required abilities and gain an adequate understanding
of the concept of trafﬁc rules [85,86]. In addition, the lack of experience among young children in
crossing roads can make them incapable of making safe decisions, and therefore is a concern for
roadway designers. This is along with unpredictable behaviors, inattentiveness, and problematic risk
perception, which have been found to be the leading reasons for child pedestrian accidents [85–87].
On the other hand, older pedestrians demonstrate more conservative behaviors in comparison with
younger people [10]. For example, the percentage of pedestrians 65 years and older crossing on
red phase is notably lower than the percentage of younger pedestrians [88]. However, physical
conditions of elderly pedestrians restrict their abilities to precisely judge the trafﬁc situation and speed
of approaching vehicles, and lead to difﬁculty negotiating curbs, and excessive start–up time before
leaving the curb [86,89]. Bennett et al. [90] observed different average of start time loss of 2.68 s and
1.3 s for all groups of pedestrians at signalized intersections and controlled mid–block crossing sites,
respectively. The start–up time to initiate the crossing is also higher among distracted pedestrians than
non-distracted pedestrians [91]. On the other hand, middle-aged adults are found to be more aware
of the trafﬁc environment by looking at oncoming trafﬁc more frequently before crossing the road,
having a larger safety margin, and better perspective skills [36]. Alcohol impaired pedestrians (in the
1980s, around 44% of killed/injured pedestrians had BACs (Blood Alcohol Concentration) of 10% or
greater) and pedestrians with physical disabilities also have different behaviors due to the mobility
impairment [92].
Pedestrians’ behaviors can be also different because of their gender. For example, females seem
to wait longer during the red phase of signalized crossings before attempting illegal crossing than
males [93]. Female pedestrians may also demonstrate less risk-taking behaviors at crossings, compared
with males [13,94]. In contrast, another observation of pedestrian behavior at crosswalks exposed no
difference between female and male risk-taking behaviors while crossing [95].
5.1.2. Pedestrian Walking Speed
One of the most fundamental elements of human movement behavior in urban spaces is walking
speed, as it is a dominant parameter of most microscopic simulation models, and which can be
affected by individual pedestrian behavior and habit [14,96]. Walking rates vary among different
studies [14,86,92,97]. In accordance with Manual on Uniform Trafﬁc Control Devices (MUTCD),
the average walking speed for typical groups of pedestrians is 1.22 m/s, suggested as a basis to
evaluate the sufﬁciency of the pedestrian clearance interval at trafﬁc signals with the possibility to
extend the phase for slower pedestrians by pressing a push-button [92,96,98]. The recommendation
for the design of trafﬁc signal timing without an actuator is lower—0.91 to 0.99 m/s [99]. However,
pedestrian crossing speed may also vary for different countries, for instance a study showed 1.53 m/s
for the average of crossing speed at intersections and mid-block crossings in Melbourne, Australia [90],
the average of 1.34 m/s in Jordan [100], 1.39 m/s at non-signalized crosswalk in Malaysia [101],
and 1.4 m/s as the design speed by the Turkish Standards Institution [102].
Walking speed declines by increasing age, as a study showed an average walking speed 1.53 m/s
for pedestrians younger than 16 years old, while 1.16 m/s for those older than 64 years old [14,103]. In
addition, the elderly, pedestrians with disabilities, and those pushing baby prams or walking along
with younger children tend to walk at slower speeds [14]. Different walking speed can be also related
to the gender, as some studies showed that, on average, males walk faster than females [96,104].
The group size can be another factor inﬂuencing the walking speed, since people in a group of two or

--- Page 9 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
9 of 24
more walk slower than individuals and take longer to complete the crossing process [14,46,104,105].
It is also found that environmental factors, such as weather, time of day (slightly higher during
the morning and evening peak period), type of facility, and the overall function of pedestrian area
(e.g., shopping, school, business) also affect the walking speed of pedestrians [14,106]. For example,
pedestrians walk faster at signalized intersections than the mid-block locations [90], when crossing
roadways than walking in a footpath [14,107], or when the trafﬁc volume is high [104,108]. This might
even turn to running in some circumstances: at signalized crosswalks to use the limited green-light
phase left to traverse the roadway, or at uncontrolled unmarked crossings or illegal sites to traverse the
road from the start of the lane to its end before arrival of approaching vehicles [36,109]. The latter one
may cause a new independent crossing task for pedestrians at each lane requiring a new evaluation of
the trafﬁc situation and possibly adjustment of the crossing manner, which may again change their
walking speed.
5.1.3. Pedestrian Group Size
The size of pedestrian platoons is associated with both pedestrian crossing behavior and driver
yielding behaviors. As the number of pedestrians waiting at crosswalks increases, the likelihood
of drivers’ yield increases. The probability of yielding is two times greater, when the number of
pedestrians waiting increases from three to six persons, since a big group captures more attention of
drivers for yielding than smaller groups [11,53,110]. It has also been found that the possibility of a group
of four pedestrians continuing to traverse crosswalk is 70% higher than individual pedestrian [13].
This also enhances safety of pedestrians, as pedestrians in groups are more detectable [36]. Due to
the frequency of crossing, smaller pedestrians’ platoons cause more trafﬁc interruptions and higher
cumulative delay, and consequently driver inconvenience compared to bigger platoons, which cross at
once [46]. Analyzing the impact of pedestrian platoons on yielding rate at illegal mid-block crossings
also revealed that the rate of “hard-yield and stop” increases signiﬁcantly by increasing the size
of groups. This shows that pedestrians in groups require longer crossing time, which might not be
provided by rolling/soft yield. Hence, drivers have to stop approaching the crossing points, which may
trigger a trafﬁc wave and last until pedestrians cross. As a result, drivers may slow down proactively
on approaching a crossing point in anticipation of a pedestrian crossing maneuvers, particularly if there
is a pedestrian platoon waiting by the roadside [46,111]. Moreover, it is observed that the waiting time
of pedestrians at zebra crossings reduces by increasing the number of pedestrians at crosswalks [94].
5.1.4. Pedestrian Presence at the Curb
The only possible way for pedestrians to indicate their crossing intention is to stand at the curb
side [47]. However, studies showed that the presence of pedestrians at the curb side does not necessarily
lead to changes of driver behavior in terms of sufﬁciently adapting the speed on approaching the zebra
crossings [32]. Pedestrians waiting at curb sides, without any attempt to cross, may even increase
driver tendency to not give way to pedestrians [37]. An observation at a zebra crossing showed
that almost none of the drivers yield to pedestrians who were waiting at the curb and looking at the
oncoming trafﬁc/drivers [112]. However, pedestrian distance to the curb is found to be one of the
most signiﬁcant explanatory variables inﬂuencing the behavior of drivers, and is utilized to model
the probability of a driver braking [13,48]. A study on users’ behaviors at crosswalks showed that
drivers are less likely to yield if a pedestrian was waiting more than half a meter away from the
curb [53]. Furthermore, when the pedestrian is already on the crossing, the probability of driver
reaction increases as the pedestrian’s distance from the curb/refuge increases [13]. At uncontrolled
mid-block crossing, higher risk-taking behaviors of pedestrians at central refuge islands is found to be
associated with longer waiting time at the ﬁrst curb (30 s waiting time or more [113]) as pedestrians
become impatient to cross the roadway [94].

--- Page 10 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
10 of 24
5.2. Environmental and Dynamic Factors Inﬂuencing Crossing Behaviors
5.2.1. Gap Acceptance
From pedestrian perspective, time, or distance gap with the closest oncoming vehicle must be
long enough for safely crossing the road [48,114]. The required time for pedestrians to cross can be
described as “critical safe gap”, and it is computed based on the crossing length and pedestrian crossing
speed [115]. Sun et al. [11] stated that there is a remarkable difference between the pedestrian GA
behavior and driver GA, due to the higher speed of motorized vehicles compared to the pedestrian’s
speed. Pedestrians need larger gaps for a safe crossing maneuvers, which may result in longer
waiting time and thus increased risk-taking behavior to accept shorter gaps [11]. The likelihood of
pedestrians accepting shorter gaps also declines, when they are in a group than individual pedestrians.
Moreover, the minimum gap accepted by younger pedestrians is smaller than the minimum gap
accepted by elderly pedestrians [10,11]. It is also observed that pedestrians accept a shorter gap,
while waiting on central refuge islands, compared to the curb side [94], or in narrow streets rather
than wide environments [63,115]. A study in the UK showed that all pedestrians accepted 10.5 s
gaps between approaching vehicle, while no one accepted gaps less than 1.5 s [116]. Accordingly,
“pedestrian critical gap” reﬂects the minimum time interval, in which no pedestrian commences
crossing [96]. Estimation of critical gap is based on the greatest and smallest accepted gap for a given
intersection [96], and can vary among road users depending on road geometry, vehicle features,
and pedestrian characteristics [10,11,48,63]. For instance, heavy vehicles accept larger gaps and have
greater courtesy towards pedestrians to compare with passenger cars [11,96]. Pedestrians also accept
available shorter and riskier gaps, when they wait too long for the critical gap [117]. A study at
unsignalized crossings found that pedestrians sought rolling gaps in high trafﬁc volume, meaning that
pedestrians do not wait for all lanes to be clear; instead, they predict where a gap will be available in
the next lane [118].
5.2.2. Speed of Approaching Vehicle
The speed of a vehicle approaching a pedestrian crossing is one of the most important factors
that pedestrians consider, when making the crossing decision [12,37]. However, pedestrians may
have some difﬁculties in estimating the speed of approaching vehicles [13]. Vehicle speed is also
identiﬁed as a factor inﬂuencing yielding behavior [114,119], where lower speeds are associated
with increased yielding behavior [13,53,120]. A study in Helsinki, Finland, found that the reacting
probability of drivers traveling at the speed of 50 km/h is nearly zero, when individual pedestrians
are just waiting at the curb, without stepping on the street [13]. Driver’s acceleration strategy (or no
deceleration) on approaching pedestrian crossings is interpreted as an implicit signal to show their
tendency to maintain priority, and not giving way to the pedestrians (see Section 4.2) [37]. However,
speed adaptation prior to reaching pedestrian crossings is a signiﬁcant factor to ensure pedestrian
safety [121]. For this reason, a sufﬁcient distance between oncoming vehicle and crosswalk is required
for drivers to react submissively to an unexpected emerging pedestrian [32]. Drivers may also be
forced to slow down (anticipatory avoidance response) or stop (delayed avoidance response) in some
risky circumstances [32]. For example, when pedestrians who commence crossing: do not look at the
oncoming trafﬁc, are distracted and running/stepping into the roadway, show sudden/unexpected
pedestrian‘s movement, or are jaywalkers [37,110].
5.2.3. Road Characteristics
Road environmental factors, such as road width to be crossed by the pedestrian, total road
width, number of lanes, and various pedestrian engineering and crossing treatments, may inﬂuence
the pedestrian–driver interactions in terms of the perceived safety of crossing and the road users’
anticipation of different types of behaviors [12,48,122]. For example, a study by Turner et al. [119]
showed that the number of lanes crossed was a signiﬁcant predictor of motorized vehicles yielding

--- Page 11 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
11 of 24
rates. The drivers’ yielding rate may also vary among different types of pedestrian crossing facilities
with various levels of control. Previous studies showed noteworthy difference in the number of
drivers who adhere to the trafﬁc rules by yielding to pedestrians at different crossings: 4–45% at
marked unsignalized crossings [123–126] vs. 17–94% at marking crossings with one type of trafﬁc
management and treatment, or written social assistance [48,76,119]. The yielding rate also varies at
marked uncontrolled crossings at entry (higher) and exit (lower) legs of roundabouts [48]. On the other
hand, pedestrians may feel safer, when the width of the crossing is shorter [53,127,128]. Pedestrian
refuge islands and high visibility markings can also produce better compliance rates on roads with
lower speed limit [119].
However, Himanen and Kulmala [13] found that road width and the
existence of refuge had no signiﬁcant effects in modeling the driver and pedestrian behaviors at
pedestrian crossings.
5.2.4. Size of Approaching Vehicle
The size of vehicles can inﬂuence the behavior of both pedestrian and driver, and is an important
factor for modeling of road users’ behaviors [11]. For instance, the possibility of pedestrians continuing
to walk is lower by 20%, when the oncoming vehicle is a lorry or bus instead of a passenger car.
The number of attempts by pedestrians to cross also declines if the oncoming vehicle is a heavy vehicle,
like a bus or a coach [94]. The probability of drivers reacting is also 30% lower amongst heavy vehicle
drivers than car drivers [13].
5.2.5. Trafﬁc Volume
Trafﬁc density is a factor that pedestrians consider, when making the crossing decision; high
trafﬁc density is considered as a risky situation [12,37]. Pedestrians also make more attempts to cross
the roadway in heavy trafﬁc volume and may be more likely to accept shorter gaps from individual
vehicles than platoons [48,94]. On the other hand, the driver’s tendency to give priority to pedestrians
declines in high trafﬁc volume [13,48,53,129]. Moreover, the possibility of the lead driver reacting
decreases by increasing number of approaching vehicles. In a group of ﬁve vehicles, the probability of
reacting can decrease by almost 40% more than with only one vehicle [13].
5.2.6. Trafﬁc Behaviors and Situations
Trafﬁc behaviors and situations like the presence of a downstream queue after the crossing [48],
yielding event in the opposite direction or adjacent travel lane [48], the gap between the car in front
and the one following behind it [12,46], distance of the oncoming vehicle [12,46], or driver’s direction
of approach towards the pedestrian [13], may have some impact on the amount of risk perceived by
road users, and thus their crossing-decision strategies.
5.3. Other Contributing Factors
In addition to the aforementioned factors, there are some other elements and circumstances
surrounding the interaction, which may inﬂuence the decision-making process at crosswalks. Such
factors include:
•
User familiarity of the place (frequent use of a particular crossing point) can be linked with
the higher risk taking behaviors of pedestrians and lower waiting time at crossing [37,94].
It also affects drivers’ behaviors on approaching a road segment with no pedestrian facilities.
For example, drivers who are familiar with a road segment are likely to drive cautiously in
anticipation of pedestrians’ unexpected crossing attempt [111], whilst the pedestrian behavior
may be surprising for those who are not familiar and can lead to conﬂict [46].
•
Size of the city [13].
•
Cultural differences, which can inﬂuence the crossing behaviors and the interpretation of informal
trafﬁc rules [81,130]. Social norms, cultures, and faith in different countries may inﬂuence the

--- Page 12 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
12 of 24
risk perception of users in crossing scenarios, and therefore their crossing behaviors [131,132].
As Western cultures are found to be more risk-prone in road crossing than Asian cultures [132–135].
Pedestrian crossing speed, and gap acceptance are also some of the factors that might be
effected by road users’ cultures [90,99]. Communication signals employed by road users and
their implications may also being interpreted differently in varied cultures [136]. For instance,
the meaning of hand gestures, or honking a horn in India may differ with the translation of such
behaviors in Germany.
•
Visibility, light and weather conditions [10,114,137,138].
5.4. The Correlation of Crossing Behaviors with Surrogate Safety Measures
Surrogate safety measures, as the name implies, are proposed as alternative or complementary
methods to identify safety issues [139].
The studies reviewed in this paper have shown some
correlations between these indicators and various pedestrian crossing behaviors and factors
inﬂuencing them:
•
The probability of pedestrians crossing the road increases by higher TTC values [63]. A study
by Schroeder [48] showed that the TTC threshold is satisﬁed, if the TTA at the crosswalk is
less than 3 s (similar ﬁnding as [63]), and everyone crossed the road, when TTC was above
7 s. He, then, analyzed the effect of different treatments at uncontrolled mid-block crossings on
yielding behavior. According to this study, TTC declined after treatments’ installation. It is also
necessary to mention that the expected value of TTC is correlated with the dependent variable
yield, in which TTC is lower at non-yielding events compared with yielding ones [48].
•
With respect to TTA indicator, an acceptable gap to execute a safe crossing maneuvers may
be determined by factors like the level of users’ risk acceptance, or pedestrian’s perception of
how long the gap is [43,137]. However, the perception may not be always correct and might
be much longer/shorter than the person’s perception [10]. Hence, a pedestrian is required to
make a comparison between two microscopic parameters to decide whether it is safe to cross or
not [10,12].
•
Road users with larger TAdv are most likely to be the ﬁrst ones who pass the common zone.
However, if the TAdv is small, the second user may accelerate with the aim of passing ﬁrst instead.
This is mainly observed when one of the users is “stronger” than the other e.g., private car vs.
pedestrian [32,35].
6. Synthesis
Walking is the most widely used mode of transportation and is subject to a considerable risk of
injury or fatality on the road, which is mainly caused by motorized vehicles. The majority of these
trafﬁc fatalities and injuries occur at pedestrian road crossing scenarios in urban settings at either
pedestrian crossings or illegal locations out of crosswalks. However, many road users interact with one
another without any serious conﬂict and are not of interest from a trafﬁc safety perspective, but vital in
terms of road users’ experience. Trafﬁc interaction, therefore, has been expanded to involve less critical
conﬂicts. Drivers may neglect the pedestrians’ right of way at some pedestrian crossing facilities
with less strict trafﬁc enforcement, and pedestrians may attempt mid-block crossing or jaywalking
in the absence of crossing facilities or just to shorten the travel time. In such situations and more
ambiguous circumstances, human road users are required to communicate their movement intentions
with another interacting party to resolve the ambiguity regarding the right of way. For an efﬁcacious
vehicle–pedestrian interaction process, users ought to indicate their own intentions, understand the
other’s intentions, and anticipate their next actions.
This cooperative procedure complies with the human interaction fundamentals in which the
interacting agents form a mutual behavioral compliance, while responding to each others actions.
Furthermore, the situation in which the communication is happening needs to be correctly understood
by trafﬁc communicators. Finally, with respect to all prerequisite input information in such trafﬁc

--- Page 13 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
13 of 24
scenes, road users utilize a broad range of implicit and explicit communication methods to coordinate
their actions with interaction partners. These signals are mostly transferred to acknowledge that
interacting parties are seen by another one, conﬁrm their intents, or to inﬂuence each other’s
yield/not-yield decision strategies. A signiﬁcant number of the reviewed studies in this paper
(approximately 29%) found that pedestrians use some form of nonverbal cues such as hand gesture,
gaze, or head movement to indicate their crossing intentions to the oncoming vehicles (see Figure 1).
In addition, 25% of the reviewed papers revealed that drivers utilize various explicit signals, such as
light indicators, horn, or hand gesture, to communicate with pedestrians on approaching crossing
sites. In addition, the majority of reviewed studies (39.3%) emphasize the importance of eye contact
establishment between drivers and pedestrians, while communicating their movement at conﬂict
points. However, pedestrians may not always receive a response from drivers by returning eye
contact, and instead may receive signals, such as hand gesture or light indicators. A smaller number of
reviewed studies (7%) indicated that using communication signals among trafﬁc participants has no
impact on yielding and trafﬁc behaviors of users.
39.3 %
Gazing or mutual eye-contact
28.6 %
Pedestrian’s nonverbal cues
25 %
Driver’s explicit cues
7.1 %
No Impact
Figure 1. Share of reviewed literature emphasizing the impact of nonverbal cues on trafﬁc behaviors.
Source: own elaboration, based on the reviewed references in this research.
On the other hand, the driver’s willingness to yield to pedestrians varies among different studies.
Figure 2 illustrates the driver’s yielding rate at various uncontrolled crossing facilities reviewed in this
paper. In Figure 2a, the crossing facilities have no treatment interventions, while Figure 2b shows the
rate at crossing sites with at least one treatment implementation, such as warning signs, or pedestrian
actuator signals. It is necessary to mention that, in Figure 2b, uncontrolled marked crossing category
includes some mid-block crossings’ rates, which were considered as uncontrolled marked for the ease
of use (e.g., the average of yielding rate for each treatment is representing all type of studied crossings
in the study performed by Turner et al. [119]).
In addition, in the priority negotiation process, drivers have some strategies to decide whether or
not to give way to pedestrians. A number of factors also inﬂuence the crossing-decision strategies of
pedestrians at crosswalks to decide whether or not cross the roadway. Figure 3 indicates a summary of
all inﬂuencing factors in the decision-making process of road users identiﬁed in the reviewed literature.
The ﬁgure illustrates how many times the inﬂuencing factors are found to be relevant in the reviewed
studies in relation to the total number of reviewed studies. As demonstrated in the ﬁgure, the impact
of road characteristics, pedestrian age, walking speed, group size, and the speed of oncoming vehicle
on behavior of trafﬁc interacting parties have been highlighted in previous studies reviewed in this
paper, while the environmental and dynamic factors have presented a higher effect. Some of these
factors also inﬂuence one another in the crossing scenarios, meaning that the presence or the quantity
of one can affect another. Figure 4 illustrates the interrelationship between factors according to the
reviewed literature.

--- Page 14 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
14 of 24
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Uncontrolled marked crossing
Uncontrolled midblock
Type of pedestrian crossing facility
Driver's yielding rate
(a)
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Uncontrolled marked crossing
Uncontrolled midblock
Type of pedestrian crossing facility
Driver's yielding rate
(b)
Figure 2.
Driver’s yielding rate at uncontrolled crossings in the reviewed literature: (a) with
no treatment interventions; (b) with treatment interventions.
Source: own elaboration, based
on [13,32,48,53,76,112,119,123–127,140].
Category
Inﬂuencing Factor
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
55%
The percentage of reviewed studies highlighted the role of inﬂuencing factor in decision-making process
Environmental
and Dynamic
Factors
Road characteristics
Speed of vehicle
Gap acceptance
Traﬃc volume
Traﬃc behaviours  and situations
Weather
Size of vehicle
Pedestrian-
Associated
Facors
Age
Walking speed
Group size
Presence at/Distance to the kerb
Gender
Other
Contributing
Factors
Culture diﬀerences
User's familiarity
Size of the city
12.0%
10.6%
8.5%
6.3%
4.9%
3.5%
2.8%
11.3%
10.6%
9.9%
5.6%
4.9%
5.6%
2.8%
0.7%
48.6%
42.3%
9.2%
Figure 3. Inﬂuencing factors in decision-making process of road users at crosswalks, and the percentage
of studies highlighted their impacts with respect to the total number of reviewed studies. Source: own
elaboration, based on the reviewed references in this research.

--- Page 15 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
15 of 24
Figure 4. Interrelationship between factors inﬂuencing crossing-decision strategies of pedestrians.
The direction of arrows shows inﬂuence direction from one factor to another. The size of the circles
changes based on the number of factors inﬂuencing them or being inﬂuenced by them. Source: own
elaboration, based on the reviewed references in this research.
7. Discussion
The state-of-the-art in negotiation and decision-making for pedestrian road crossings has achieved
signiﬁcant progress on identifying the prominent behaviors of vehicles and pedestrians, the interactions
between such trafﬁc users and the factors that inﬂuence the most, synergies between pedestrians and
motorized vehicles. It is evident from the reviewed literature that studies are so far mostly focused
on a limited number of factors inﬂuencing driver–pedestrian interactions (e.g., speed of vehicle,
road geometry) and investigate their impact on behaviors and decision-making processes of both
pedestrians and drivers. Furthermore, the effect of communication methods and intention propagation
are usually studied by focusing on speciﬁc strategies (yielding behaviors or non-yielding behaviors)
without taking into account the decision-making process of road users and investigating the factors
that may inﬂuence the process. However, the reviewed literature showed that road users adopt their
crossing strategies by considering a broad range of factors knowingly (such as estimation of time
and distance gap) or unknowingly (such as inﬂuence of age or gender), while they employ different
communication techniques to ease the interaction when it is needed. This shows the complexity of
the vehicle–pedestrian interaction, in which solely consideration of some factors or communication
methods may not provide a consummate understanding of the process. This becomes crucial for the
design of emerging technologies such as ADS, requiring an accurate comprehension of human road
users’ behaviors in a trafﬁc interaction to correctly predict their reactions and fulﬁll their expectations.
With the purpose of advances in vehicle–pedestrian safety, the consideration of those interactions from
ADS and the enhancement of existing infrastructure, a holistic approach is oddly yet to be considered by
researchers with regards to modeling interactions of pedestrians with vehicles. However, for example,
the authors in [141] have introduced a novel data-set to analyze the pedestrian behavior in interaction
with vehicles by taking into account a wide range of behavioral, contextual, and dynamic factors,
as from the authors’ point of view sole consideration of dynamic variables (such as speed or trajectory)
is not sufﬁcient enough for prediction of pedestrians behaviors. Such an approach emphasizes even
more the necessity of a vehicle–pedestrian interaction framework for a better perception of users’
behaviors. Based on the ﬁndings of the reviewed literature, Figure 5 presents an example of how
a holistic approach for vehicle–pedestrian interactions could be shaped.

--- Page 16 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
16 of 24
pedestrian
Pedestrian
Vehicle
Is it safe to
cross?
Evaluation/monitoring of
potential conﬂict zone
No
Yes
Indication of initial 
crossing intention
Interaction Starts
Schema formation
Assessment of the environment
Presence at/distance to
the kerb
Mobility ability of pedestrian:
- Children
- Pedestrian with
pram/wheelchair/cane
- Spatial: road characteristics,
trafﬁc volume, geography, direction
of approach
- Temporal: time and distance gap
- Social: group size
Communication environment 
vehicle
Communication methods
Gaze direction/head
orientation 
Drivers' explicit
cues
Drivers' implicit
cues
Hand gestures 
Communicating 
intentions?
Yes
No
pedestrian
vehicle
Strategies
-Hard yield
-Soft yield
-Hard yield and stop
-Appraising
-Stop/step back
-Approaching
-Crossing
Yes
Interaction Ends:
one of the
interacting parties
has to yield
Driver point of view
Adjustment to the
road requirements
- Type/size of vehicle
- Speed of vehicle
Pedestrian point of view
Choosing strategy
No
Final
 strategies?
Detection
of
 interactive
parties
Start
End
Figure 5. The simpliﬁed vehicle–pedestrian interaction process for the road crossing scenarios. Source:
own elaboration, based on the reviewed references in this research.
According to Figure 5, the vehicle–pedestrian interaction can be divided into ﬁve different phases
in order to simplify their decision-making process. Before forming any interaction among road users,
interacting parties superﬁcially evaluate the road characteristics on approaching the potential conﬂict
zone. In this pre-interaction phase, a pedestrian selects the crossing point, while the drivers, on the
other hand, continuously monitor the road and ideally adjust their behaviors in accordance with the
road/trafﬁc requirements. This phase is not directly involved in the vehicle–pedestrian interactions;
rather, it can prepare the vehicle for an anticipatory avoidance response, rather than a delayed one on
approaching a potential encountering zone. Pedestrians, then, indicate their initial crossing intentions
to the users approaching the common zone, which is generally achieved through presence at or walking
towards the curb. When interaction starts (the moment interacting parties detect each other), involved
road users have their very ﬁrst assessment about the communication environment, where they can
select their strategies according to the received information and their assessment. Trafﬁc participants
can utilize communication cues to indicate their intentions or directly perform their selected crossing
strategies. The interaction ends when at least one of the agents leaves the conﬂict zone, and can be
repeated with a replaced approaching road user for the one who has not obtained the right of way.
However, during the interaction, interactive agents can change their strategies or execute more than
one strategy, while negotiating the right of way. Such situations generally require agents to reassess
the communication environment, and communicate their new movement intentions with one another.
This holistic interaction process can provide recommendations for designing the decision-making
systems of automated driving technology in confronting pedestrians. It aims at simplifying the
complex decision-making procedure of pedestrians by considering the most signiﬁcant factors and
communication methods inﬂuencing the process. Furthermore, it could become part of the maneuvers’
planning module of ADS ensuring safe maneuvering among populated spaces [142]. Finally, according
to such a holistic approach, effective communication protocols and devices could be designed for
faster, more comprehensive and efﬁcient negotiations of road crossings. For example, smart-phone
notiﬁcations [143], sound and optical signals [62,144], or illuminating signs [25] could provide
signiﬁcant help in the future for pedestrians and their corresponding actions, while on the road.
Understanding the sequence of events in the vehicle–pedestrian interactions may help ADS to perform
more effective communication strategies than always coming to a complete stop for pedestrians
detected in their path [145]. The communication cues employed by ADS can also vary based on the
environment evaluation, such as indicating visually designed eHMI instead of audible one, when the

--- Page 17 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
17 of 24
pedestrian’s head is oriented towards the vehicle, or utilizing messages with the command concept
rather than requesting when the pedestrian hesitates to cross.
In the present state-of-the-art, various methods have been employed to investigate the
pedestrian crossing behaviors and their interaction with ADS, such as virtual reality (VR)-based
simulations [146,147], the Wizard-of-Oz technique, in which the driver is hidden in the driver
seat [148,149], and using the real-life exposure of automated bus shuttles [150,151].
Keferböck
and Riener [152] evaluated various signs and gestures of pedestrians to explore the importance
of vehicle–pedestrian interaction, and the necessity for implementation of them in the communication
systems of ADS. Other studies raised relevant questions concerning the design of external
communication cues, the content of communication, and the impact of different environmental factors
on crossing behaviors [141,146,149,150]. Future research can potentially address pedestrian crossing
behaviors and their decision-making process with respect to ADS, as a new interacting party on the
road. A thorough insight into the possible changes of pedestrians’ crossing-decisions while interacting
with fully automated vehicles, the communication signals that pedestrians expect to receive, and the
applicability of the current communication methods can be crucial for the design of ADS and thus
successful deployment of such technologies. Moreover, the ubiquity of smart devices like mobile-phone,
and their prevailing role in today’s life of people may alter the trafﬁc interaction concept. As distracted
pedestrians are no longer an active party in the interaction process, and vehicles have to ﬁrst detect
such users and then react appropriately to avoid conﬂict. Such imperfect trafﬁc interactions could be
investigated in the future work.
Author Contributions: The authors conﬁrm contributions to the paper as follows: study conception and design,
investigation, resources, and writing—original draft preparation: R.E.A.; writing—review and editing, supervision:
C.K. and C.A.
Funding: This work was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG) and the Technical University of
Munich within the Open Access Publishing Funding Program.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyzes, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
GA
Gap Acceptance
PET
Post-Encroachment-Time
TTC
Time-To-Collision
TTA
Time-To-Arrival
TAdv
Time Advantage
ADS
Automated Driving System
MUTCD
Manual on Uniform Trafﬁc Control Devices
eHMI
External Human–Machine Interface
VR
Virtual Reality
References
1.
Svensson, A. A Method for Analysing the Trafﬁc Process in a Safety Perspective; Lund Institute of Technology
Sweden: Lund, Sweden, 1998.
2.
Holmberg, B.; Hydén, C. Traﬁken i Samhallet: Grunder för Planering och Utformning; Studentlitteratur: Lund,
Sweden, 1996.
3.
Häkkinen, S.; Luoma, J. Liikennepsykologia (Trafﬁc Psychology); Otatieto: Hämeenlinna, Finland, 1991; p. 38.
4.
Nevile, M. Seeing on the move: Mobile collaboration on the battleﬁeld. In Interaction and Mobility: Language
and the Body in Motion; Walter de Gruyter: Berlin, Germany, 2013; pp. 152–176.
5.
Schneemann, F.; Gohl, I.
Analyzing driver-pedestrian interaction at crosswalks: A contribution to
autonomous driving in urban environments. IEEE Intell. Veh. Symp. Proc. 2016, 38–43. [CrossRef]

--- Page 18 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
18 of 24
6.
Färber, B. Communication and communication problems between autonomous vehicles and human drivers.
In Autonomous Driving; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2016; pp. 125–144.
7.
Rasouli, A.; Tsotsos, J.K. Joint attention in driver-pedestrian interaction: From theory to practice. arXiv 2018,
arXiv:1802.02522.
8.
Camara, F.; Giles, O.; Madigan, R.; Rothmüller, M.; Rasmussen, P.H.; Vendelbo-larsen, S.A.; Markkula, G.;
Lee, Y.M.; Garach-morcillo, L.; Merat, N.; et al. Filtration analysis of pedestrian-vehicle interactions for
autonomous vehicle control. In Proceedings of the IAS-15, Baden-Baden, Germany, 11–15 June 2018.
9.
Nuñez Velasco, J.; Farah, H.; van Arem, B.; Hagenzieker, M.; Nuñez Velasco, P.; Farah, H.; van Arem, B.;
Hagenzieker, M. Interactions between vulnerable road users and automated vehicles: A synthesis of
literature and framework for future research. In Proceedings of the Road Safety and Simulation International
Conference, Hague, The Netherlands, 17–19 October 2017; Volume 2017, pp. 16–19.
10.
Beggiato, M.; Witzlack, C.; Krems, J.F. Gap acceptance and time-to-arrival estimates as basis for informal
communication between pedestrians and vehicles. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications, Oldenburg, Germany, 24–27 September
2017; pp. 50–57.
11.
Sun, D.; Ukkusuri, S.; Benekohal, R.F.; Waller, S.T.
Modelling of motorist-pedestrian interaction at
uncontrolled mid-block crosswalks. In Proceedings of the 82nd Annual Meeting of the Transportation
Research Board, Washington, DC, USA, 12–16 January 2003.
12.
Pawar, D.; Patil, G. Pedestrian temporal and spatial gap acceptance at mid-block street crossing in developing
world. J. Saf. Res. 2015, 52, 39–46. [CrossRef]
13.
Himanen, V.; Kulmala, R. An application of logit models in analysing the behavior of pedestrians and car
drivers on pedestrian crossings. Accid. Anal. Prev. 1988, 20, 187–197. [CrossRef]
14.
Willis, A.; Gjersoe, N.; Havard, C.; Kerridge, J.; Kukla, R. Human movement behavior in urban spaces:
Implications for the design and modeling of effective pedestrian environments. Environ. Plan. B Plan. Des.
2004, 31, 805–828. [CrossRef]
15.
Ackermann, C.; Beggiato, M.; Schubert, S.; Krems, J.F. An experimental study to investigate design and
assessment criteria: What is important for communication between pedestrians and automated vehicles?
Appl. Ergon. 2019, 75, 272–282. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Parkin, J.; Clark, B.; Clayton, W.; Ricci, M.; Parkhurst, G. Understanding Interactions between Autonomous
Vehicles and Other Road Users: A Literature Review; University of the West of England: Bristol, UK, 2016.
17.
Camara, F.; Romano, R.; Markkula, G.; Madigan, R.; Merat, N.; Fox, C. Empirical game theory of pedestrian
interaction for autonomous vehicles. In Proceedings of the Measuring Behavior 2018, Manchester, UK,
14 March 2018.
18.
Litman, T. Autonomous Vehicle Implementation Predictions: Implications for Transport Planning; Victoria Transport
Policy Institute: Victoria, BC, Canada, 2017.
19.
Rama, P.; Koskinen, H.
Three driver and operator behavior models in the context of automated
driving–identiﬁcation of issues from human actor perspective. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 17–21 July 2017; Springer: Cham,
Switzerland, 2017; pp. 1059–1071.
20.
Vinkhuyzen, E.; Cefkin, M. Developing socially acceptable autonomous vehicles.
In Proceedings of
the Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference, Minneapolis, MN, USA, 29 August–1 September 2016;
pp. 522–534.
21.
Fuest, T.; Sorokin, L.; Bellem, H.; Bengler, K. Taxonomy of trafﬁc situations for the interaction between
automated vehicles and human road users. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Applied
Human Factors and Ergonomics, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 17–21 July 2017; pp. 708–719.
22.
Matthews, M.; Chowdhary, G.; Kieson, E.
Intent communication between autonomous vehicles and
pedestrians. arXiv 2017, arXiv:1708.07123.
23.
Lundgren, V.; Habibovic, A.; Andersson, J.; Lagstrom, T.; Nilsson, M.; Sirkka, A.; Saluaar, D. Will there
be new communication needs when introducing automated vehicles to the urban context? In Advances in
Human Aspects of Transportation; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2017; pp. 485–497.
24.
Merat, N.; Louw, T.; Madigan, R.; Wilbrink, M.; Schieben, A. What externally presented information do
VRUs require when interacting with fully Automated Road Transport Systems in shared space? Accid. Anal.
Prev. 2018, 118, 244–252. [CrossRef]

--- Page 19 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
19 of 24
25.
Zhang, J.; Vinkhuyzen, E.; Cefkin, M. Evaluation of an autonomous vehicle external communication system
concept: A survey study. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Applied Human Factors and
Ergonomics, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 17–21 July 2017; pp. 650–661.
26.
Parker Jr, M.; Zegeer, C. Trafﬁc Conﬂict Techniques for Safety and Operations: Observers Manual; Technical
Report; United States Federal Highway Administration: Washington, DC, USA, 1989.
27.
Thompson, C. When pedestrians ruled the streets. Smithsonian Magazine, 14 December 2014.
28.
Cloutier, M.; Lachapelle, U.; Amours-Quellet, A.; Bergeron, J.; Lord, S.; Torres, J. “Outta my way!” Individual
and environmental correlates for interactions between pedestrians and vehicles during street crossings.
Accid. Anal. Prev. 2017, 104, 36–45. [CrossRef]
29.
Juhlin, O. Trafﬁc behavior as social interaction-implications for the design of artiﬁcial drivers. In Proceedings
of the 6th World Congress on Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS), Toronto, ON, Canada, 8–12 November 1999.
30.
Lehsing, C.; Feldstein, I.T.
Urban interaction—Geting vulnerable road users into driving simulation.
In UR:BAN Human Factors in Trafﬁc; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2017; pp. 347–362.
31.
Nor, S.; Daniel, B.; Hamidun, R.; Al Bargi, W.; Rohani, M.; Prasetijo, J.; Aman, M.; Ambak, K. Analysis of
pedestrian gap acceptance and crossing decision in Kuala Lumpur. In Proceedings of the MATEC Web
of Conferences, Wuhan, China, 20–21 December 2017; EDP Science: Les Ulis, France, 2017; Volume 103,
p. 08014.
32.
Várhelyi, A. Drivers’ speed behavior at a zebra crossing: A case study. Accid. Anal. Prev. 1998, 30, 731–743.
[CrossRef]
33.
Kaparias, I.; Bell, M.; Dong, W.; Sastrawinata, A.; Singh, A.; Wang, X.; Mount, B.
Analysis of
pedestrian-vehicle trafﬁc conﬂicts in street designs with elements of shared space.
Transp. Res. Rec.
2013, 2393, 21–30. [CrossRef]
34.
Tresilian, J. Perceptual and cognitive processes in time-to-contact estimation: Analysis of prediction-motion
and relative judgment tasks. Percept. Psychophys. 1995, 57, 231–245. [CrossRef]
35.
Laureshyn, A.; Svensson, A.; Hydén, C. Evaluation of trafﬁc safety, based on micro-level behavioral data:
theoretical framework and ﬁrst implementation. Accid. Anal. Prev. 2010, 42, 1637–1646. [CrossRef]
36.
Zhuang, X.; Wu, C. Pedestrians’ crossing behaviors and safety at unmarked roadway in China. Accid. Anal.
Prev. 2011, 43, 1927–1936. [CrossRef]
37.
Sucha, M. Road users’ strategies and communication: Driver-pedestrian interaction. In Proceedings of the
Transport Research Arena (TRA) 5th Conference, Paris, France, 14–17 April 2014.
38.
Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development.
OECD Anual Report;
Technical Report;
Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development: Paris, France, 2009.
39.
Hunter, W.; Stutts, J.; Pein, W.; Cox, C. Pedestrian and Bicycle Crash Types of the Early 1990’s; Technical Report;
Turner-Fairbank Highway Research Center: McLean, VA, USA, 1996.
40.
Helmers, G.; Åberg, L. Driver Behaviour in Intersections as Related to Priority Rules and Road Design. An
Exploratory Study; Technical Report; VTI: Linköping, Sweden, 1978.
41.
Ibrahim, N.; Kidwai, F.; Karim, M. Motorists and pedestrian interaction at unsignalized pedestrian crossing.
In Proceedings of the Eastern Asia Society for Transportation Studies, Association for Planning Transportation
Studies, Tokyo, Japan, 2005; Volume 5, pp. 120–125.
42.
Dey, D.; Terken, J. Pedestrian interaction with vehicles: Roles of explicit and implicit communication.
In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular
Applications, Oldenburg, Germany, 24–27 September 2017; pp. 109–113.
43.
Chandra, S.; Rastogi, R.; Das, V. Descriptive and parametric analysis of pedestrian gap acceptance in mixed
trafﬁc conditions. KSCE J. Civ. Eng. 2014, 18, 284–293. [CrossRef]
44.
FHWA Course on Bicycle and Pedestrian Transportation;
Mid-Block Crossings, Lesson 16;
Technical
Report. FHWA-RD-99-198; United States, Federal Highway Administration, Ofﬁce of Safety Research
and Development: Washington, DC, USA, 1999
45.
Maryland S.H.A. Bicycle and Pedestrian Design Guidelines; Chapter 10: Roadway Crossing Design; Technical
Report; Maryland Department of Transportation, State Highway Administration: Baltimore, MD, USA, 2013.
46.
Malenje, J.O.; Zhao, J.; Li, P.; Han, Y. An extended car-following model with the consideration of the illegal
pedestrian crossing. Phys. A Stat. Mech. Its Appl. 2018, 508, 650–661. [CrossRef]
47.
Crowley-Koch, B.J.; Van Houten, R.; Lim, E. Effects of pedestrian prompts on motorist yielding At crosswalks.
J. Appl. Behav. Anal. 2011, 44, 121–126. [CrossRef]

--- Page 20 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
20 of 24
48.
Schroeder, B. A Behaviour-Based Methodology for Evaluating Pedestrian-Vehicle Interaction at Crosswalks.
Ph.D. Thesis, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA, 2008.
49.
Harrel, W. The impact of pedestrian visibility and assertiveness on motorist yielding. J. Soc. Psychol. 1993,
133, 353–360. [CrossRef]
50.
Lehsing, C.; Fleischer, M.; Bengler, K. On the track of social interaction—A non-linear quantiﬁcation
approach in trafﬁc conﬂict research. In Proceedings of the IEEE 19th International Conference on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, ITSC, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 1–4 November 2016; pp. 2046–2051.
51.
Emmenegger, C.; Risto, M.; Bergen, B.; Norman, D.; Hollan, J. The critical importance of standards for
the communication between autonomous vehicles and humans.
Presented at the Automated Vehicles
Symposium 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA, 19–21 July 2016.
52.
Bliersbach, G.; Culp, W.; Geiler, M.; Hess, M.; Schlag, B.; Schuh, K. Gefuhlswelten im Strassenverkehr. Emotionen,
Motive, Einstellungen, Verhalten; German Trafﬁc Safety Council: Bonn, Germany, 2002.
53.
Sucha, M.; Dostal, D.; Risser, R. Pedestrian-Driver communication and decision strategies at marked
crossings. Accid. Anal. Prev. 2017, 102, 41–50. [CrossRef]
54.
Wilde, G.J.S. Social interaction patterns in driver behavior: An introductory review. Hum. Factors 1976,
18, 477–492. [CrossRef]
55.
Merten, K. Kommunikationsprozesse im Straßenverkehr. In Symposion 77; Bundesanstalt fur Straßenwesen,
Ed.; Bundesanstalt fur Strassenwesen: Koln, Germany, 1977.
56.
Kitazaki, S.; Myrhe, N. Effects of non-verbal communication cues on decisions and conﬁdence of drivers at
an uncontrolled intersection. In Proceedings of the Eighth International Driving Symposium on Human
Factors in Driver Assessment, Training and Vehicle Design, Iowa City, IA, USA, 22–25 June 2015; pp. 113–119.
57.
Lagstrom, T.; Lundgren, M. AVIP-Autonomous Vehicles Interaction with Pedestrians. Master’s Thesis,
Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2015.
58.
Zimmermann, M.; Bauer, S.; Lutteken, N.; Rothkirch, I.; Bengler, K. Acting together by mutual control:
Evaluation of a multimodal interaction concept for cooperative driving. In Proceedings of the Collaboration
Technologies and Systems (CTS), Minneapolis, MN, USA, 19–23 May 2014; pp. 227–235.
59.
Jiang, X.; Wang, W.; Mao, Y.; Bengler, K.; Bubb, H. Situational factors of inﬂuencing drivers to give precedence
to jaywalking pedestrians at signalized crosswalk. Int. J. Comput. Intell. Syst. 2011, 4, 1407–1414. [CrossRef]
60.
Knapp, M.; Hall, J.; Horgan, T. Nonverbal Communication in Human Interaction; Cengage Learning: Boston,
MA, USA, 2013.
61.
Gough, M.
Machine smarts: How will pedestrians negotiate with driverless cars?
The Guardian,
8 September 2016.
62.
Song, Y.E.; Lehsing, C.; Fuest, T.; Bengler, K. External HMIs and their effect on the interaction between
pedestrians and automated vehicles. Adv. Intell. Syst. Comput. 2018, 722, 13–18.
63.
Schmidt, S.; Färber, B. Pedestrians at the curb–Recognising the action intentions of humans. Transp. Res.
Part Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav. 2009, 12, 300–310. [CrossRef]
64.
Rasouli, A.; Kotseruba, I.; Tsotsos, J.K. Understanding pedestrian behavior in complex trafﬁc scenes.
IEEE Trans. Intell. Veh. 2018, 3, 61–70. [CrossRef]
65.
Wilde, G. Immediate and delayed social interaction in road user behavior. J. Appl. Psychol. 1980, 29, 439–460.
[CrossRef]
66.
Zhuang, X.; Wu, C. Pedestrian gestures increase driver yielding at uncontrolled mid-block road crossings.
Accid. Anal. Prev. 2014, 70, 235–244. [CrossRef]
67.
Rasouli, A.; Kotseruba, I.; Tsotsos, J.K. Agreeing to cross: How drivers and pedestrians communicate.
In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), Redondo Beach, CA, USA, 11–14 June
2017; pp. 264–269.
68.
Blommaert, J.; Huang, A. Historical bodies and historical space. J. Appl. Linguist. 2009, 6, 267–282.
69.
Sansone, C.; Morf, C.; Panter, A. The sage handbook of methods. In Social Psychology; Sage: Thousand Oaks,
CA, USA, 2004.
70.
Underwood, G.; Chapman, P.; Berger, Z.; Crundall, D. Driving experience attentional focusing, and the recall
of recently inspected events. Transp. Res. Part F Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav. 2003, 6, 289–304. [CrossRef]
71.
Kellermann, K.; Cole, T. Classifying compliance gaining messages: Taxonomic disorder and strategic
confusion. Commun. Theory 1994, 4, 3–60. [CrossRef]

--- Page 21 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
21 of 24
72.
Haddington, P.; Rauniomaa, M. Interaction between road users: Offering space in trafﬁc. Space Cult. 2014,
17, 176–190. [CrossRef]
73.
Jensen, O. Negotiation in motion: Unpacking a geography of mobility.
Space Cult. 2010, 13, 389–402.
[CrossRef]
74.
Cialdini, R.B.; Goldstein, N.J. Social inﬂuence: Compliance and conformity. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 2004,
55, 591–621. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75.
Ministry of Transport Public Works and Water Management.
Road Trafﬁc Signs and Regulations in The
Netherlands;
Technical Report; Ministry of Transport Public Works and Water Management: Hague,
The Netherlands, 2010.
76.
Nasar, J.L. Prompting drivers to stop for crossing pedestrians. Transp. Res. Part F Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav. 2003,
6, 175–182. [CrossRef]
77.
Gueguen, N.; Meineri, S.; Eyssartier, C. A pedestrian’s stare and drivers’ stopping behavior: A ﬁeld
experiment at the pedestrian crossing. Saf. Sci. 2015, 75, 87–89. [CrossRef]
78.
Ren, Z.; Jiang, X.; Wang, W. Analysis of the inﬂuence of pedestrians’ eye contact on drivers’ comfort
boundary during the crossing conﬂict. Procedia Eng. 2016, 137, 399–406. [CrossRef]
79.
AlAdawy, D.; Glazer, M.; Terwilliger, J.; Schmidt, H.; Domeyer, J.; Mehler, B.; Reimer, B.; Fridman, L. Eye
Contact between pedestrians and drivers. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1904.04188.
80.
Zaidel, D.M. A modeling perspective on the culture of driving.
Accid. Anal. Prev. 1992, 24, 585–597.
[CrossRef]
81.
Risto, M.; Emmenegger, C.; Vinkhuyzen, E.; Cefkin, M.; Hollan, J. Human-Vehicle interfaces: The power
of vehicle movement gestures in human road user coordination. In Proceedings of the 9th International
Driving Symposium on Human Factors in Driver Assessment, Training and Vehicle Design, Iowa City, IA,
USA, 26–29 June 2017.
82.
Hutchins, E.; Weibel, N.; Emmenegger, C.; Fouse, A.; Holder, B. An integrative approach to understanding
ﬂight crew activity. J. Cogn. Eng. Decis. Mak. 2013, 7, 353–376. [CrossRef]
83.
Hall, E.T. The Hidden Dimension; Doubleday: Garden City, NY, USA, 1969; Volume 609.
84.
Gorrini, A.; Vizzari, G.; Bandini, S. Towards modeling pedestrian- vehicle interactions: Empirical study on
urban unsignalized intersection. arXiv 2016, arXiv:1610.07892.
85.
Johansson, C.; Gårder, P.; Leden, L. The effect of change of code on safety and mobility for children and
elderly as pedestrians at marked crosswalks: A case study Comparing Sweden to Finland. In Proceedings of
the Annual TRB Meeting, Washington, DC, USA, 11–15 January 2004; pp. 1–20.
86.
FHWA. Federal Highway Administration University Course on Bicycle And Pedestrian Transportation, Lesson 8
Pedestrian Characteristics; FHWA: Washington, DC, USA, 2006; p. 452.
87.
Rosenbloom, T.; Ben-Eliyahu, A.; Nemrodov, D. Children’s crossing behavior with an accompanying adult.
Saf. Sci. 2008, 46, 1248–1254. [CrossRef]
88.
Chandrapp, A.; Bhattacharyya, K.; Maitra, B. Estimation of post-encroachment time and threshold wait time
for pedestrians on a busy urban corridor in a heterogeneous trafﬁc environment: An experience in Kolkata.
Asian Transp. Stud. 2016, 4, 421–429.
89.
Staplin, L.; Lococo, K.; Byington, S.; Harkey, D. Guidelines and Recommendations to Accommodate Older Driver
and Pedestrians; No. FHWA-RD-01-051; Turner-Fairbank Highway Research Center: McLean, VA, USA, 2001.
90.
Bennett, S.; Felton, A.; Akçelik, R.
Pedestrian movement characteristics at signalized intersections.
In Proceedings of the 23rd Conference of Australian Institutes of Transport Research (CAITR), Clayton, VIC,
Australia, 10–12 December 2001.
91.
Neider, M.B.; McCarley, J.S.; Crowell, J.A.; Kaczmarski, H.; Kramer, A.F. Pedestrians, vehicles, and cell
phones. Accid. Anal. Prev. 2010, 42, 589–594. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92.
Zegeer, C. Design and Safety of Pedestrian Facilities—A Recommended Practice; Trafﬁc Engineering Council
Committe TENC-5A-5; Institute of Transportation Engineers: Washington, DC, USA, 1988.
93.
Tiwari, G.; Bangdiwala, S.; Saraswat, A.; Gaurav, S. Survival analysis: pedestrian risk exposure at signalized
intersections. Transp. Res. Part F Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav. 2007, 10, 77–89. [CrossRef]
94.
Hamed, M. Analysis of pedestrians’ behavior at pedestrian crossings. Saf. Sci. 2001, 38, 63–82. [CrossRef]
95.
Papadimitriou, E.; Lassarre, S.; Yannis, G. Pedestrian risk taking while road crossing: A comparison of
observed and declared behavior. Transp. Res. Procedia. Transp. Res. Arena 2016, 14, 4354–4363. [CrossRef]

--- Page 22 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
22 of 24
96.
Transportation Research Board. Highway Capacity Manual; Transportation Research Board: Washington, DC,
USA, 2000; p. 1207. [CrossRef]
97.
US Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration. Older Pedestrians Characteristics for Use
in Highway Design; Technical Report; US Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration:
Washington, DC, USA, 1993.
98.
US Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration.
Manual on Uniform Trafﬁc Control
Devices for Streets and Highways; Technical Report May; US Department of Transportation Federal Highway
Administration: Washington, DC, USA, 2009.
99.
Dewar, R.
Driver and pedestrian characteristics.
In Trafﬁc Engineering Handbook;
Prentice Hall:
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 1992; Chapter 1.
100. Tarawneh, M.S. Evaluation of pedestrian speed in Jordan with investigation of some contributing factors.
J. Saf. Res. 2001, 32, 229–236. [CrossRef]
101. Goh, B.H.; Subramaniam, K.; Wai, Y.T.; Mohamed, A.A.; Ali, A. Pedestrian crossing speed: The case of
Malaysia. Int. J. Trafﬁc Transp. Eng. 2012, 2, 323–332. [CrossRef]
102. Turkish Standards Institute.
Urban Roads—Design Criteria on Sidewalks and Pedestrian Areas (TS12174);
Technical Report; Turkish Standards Institute: Ankara, Turkey, 2012.
103. Dahlstedt, S. Walking speeds and walking habits of elderly people. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Transport for the Elderly and Handicapped, Loughborough University of Technology,
Cambridge, UK, 4–7 April 1978.
104. Knoblauch, R.; Pietrucha, M.; Nitzburg, M. Field studies of pedestrian walking speed and start-up time.
Transp. Res. Rec. 1996, 1538, 27–38. [CrossRef]
105. Vanumu, L.D.; Rao, K.R.; Tiwari, G.
Analysis of Pedestrian Group Behaviour.
In Proceedings of
the Transportation Research Board 96th Annual Meeting, No. 17-04866, Washington, DC, USA, 8–12
January 2017.
106. Rotton, J.; Shatts, M.; Standers, R.
Temperature and pedestrian tempo: Walking without awareness.
Environ. Behav. 1990, 22, 650–674. [CrossRef]
107. Lam, W.; Morrall, J.; Ho, H. Pedestrian ﬂow characteristics in Hong Kong. Transp. Res. Rec. 1995, 1487, 56–62.
108. Fugger, T.; Randles, B.; Stein, A.; Whiting, W.; Gallagher, B.
Analysis of pedestrian gait and
perception-reaction at signal-controlled crosswalk intersections.
Transp. Res. Rec. 2000, 1705, 20–25.
[CrossRef]
109. Yang, J.; Deng, W.; Wang, J.; Li, Q.; Wang, Z. Modelling pedestrians’ road crossing behavior in trafﬁc system
micro-simulation in China. Transp. Res. Part A Policy Pract. 2006, 40, 280–290. [CrossRef]
110. Katz, A.; Zaidel, D.; Elgrishi, A. An experimental study of driver and pedestrian interaction during the
crossing conﬂict. Hum. Factors 1975, 17, 514–527. [CrossRef]
111. Yi-Rong, K.; Di-Hua, S.; Shu-Hong, Y.
A new car-following model considering driver’s individual
anticipation behavior. Nonlinear Dyn. 2015, 82, 1293–1302. [CrossRef]
112. Persson, H. Communication between Pedestrians and Car Drivers; Lund University: Lund, Sweden, 1988.
113. Dunn, R.; Pretty, R. Mid-Block pedestrian crossings—An examination of delay. In Proceedings of the 12th
Annual Australian Road Research Board Conference, Hobart, Tasmania, Australia, 27–31 August 1984.
114. Schleinitz, K.;
Petzoldt, T.;
Krems, J.
Geschwindigkeitswahrnehmung von einspurigen Fahrzeugen;
Forschungsbericht 33; Gesamtverband der Deutschen Versicherungswirtschaft: Berlin, Germany, 2015.
115. Department of Main Roads. Intersections at Grade Chapter 13; Technical Report October; Department of Main
Roads, Road Planning and Design Manual: Queensland, Australia, 2006.
116. Cohen, J.; Dearnaley, E.; C, H. The risk taken in crossing a road. J. Oper. Res. Soc. 1955, 6, 120–128. [CrossRef]
117. Antic, B.; Pesic, D.; Milutinovic, N.; Maslac, M. Pedestrian behaviors: Validation of the Serbian version of
the pedestrian behavior scale. Transp. Res. Part F Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav. 2016, 41, 170–178. [CrossRef]
118. Brewer, M.; Fitzpatrick, K.; Whitacre, J.; Lord, D. Exploration of pedestrian gap acceptance behavior at
selected locations. Transp. Res. Rec. 2006, 1982, 132–140. [CrossRef]
119. Turner, S.; Fitzpatrick, K.; Brewer, M.; Park, E. Motorist yielding to pedestrians at unsignalized intersections:
Findings from a national study on improving pedestrian safety. Transp. Res. Rec. 2006, 1982, 1–12. [CrossRef]
120. Geruschat, D.; Hassan, S. Driver behavior in yielding to sighted and blind pedestrians at roundabouts. J. Vis.
Impair. Blind. 2005, 99, 286–302. [CrossRef]
121. Risser, R. behavior in trafﬁc conﬂict situations. Accid. Anal. Prev. 1985, 2, 179–197. [CrossRef]

--- Page 23 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
23 of 24
122. Lin, P.S.; Kourtellis, A.; Wang, Z.; Guo, R. Understanding Interactions between Drivers and Pedestrian Features at
Signalized Intersections; Technical Report; Florida. Dept. of Transportation: Gainesville, FL, USA, 2015.
123. Traﬁkkontoret. Do Car Drivers Give Priority to Pedestrians at Unsignalized Zebra Crossings? A Study on Safety
and Behaviour; (Rapport No. 10); Träﬁknamnden: Göteborg, Sweden, 1994.
124. Hydén, C.; Odelid, K.; Varhelyi, A. Effekten av Generell Hastighetsdämpning i Tätort. Resultat av ett Storskaligt
Försök i Växjö; Bulletin 131; Lund University: Lund, Sweden, 1995.
125. Danielsson, S.; Gustafsson, S.; Hageback, C.; Johansson, U.; Olsson, C. Korsningen Radhusgatan-Storgatan;
Seminarieuppgift i Traﬁkanalys, Tekniska Hogskolan i Lulea: Lulea, Sweden, 1993.
126. Lehka, E. Bezpecnost Chodcu na Prechodech v Ceske Republice a Dansku. In Pedestrian-Driver Communication
and Decision Strategies at Marked Crossings. Accident Analysis and Prevention; Sucha, M., Dostal, R., Risser, R.,
Eds.; CVUT: Prague, Czech Republic, 2015.
127. Fitzpatrick, K.; Turner, S.; Brewer, M.; Carlson, P.; Ullman, B.; Trout, N.; Park, E.S.; Whitacre, J.; Lalani, N.;
Lord, D. Improving Pedestrian Safety at Unsignalized Crossings; Technical Report; Transportation Research
Board of the National Academies: Washington, DC, USA, 2006.
128. Zegeer, C.V.; Carter, D.L.; Hunter, W.W.; Stewart, J.R.; Huang, H.; Do, A.; Sandt, L. Index for assessing
pedestrian safety at intersections. Transp. Res. Rec. 2006, 1982, 76–83. [CrossRef]
129. Schroeder, B.; Rouphail, N. Event-Based modeling of driver yielding behavior at unsignalized crosswalks. J.
Transp. Eng. 2011, 137, 455–465. [CrossRef]
130. Lijuan, L. Eye contact and cross-cultural communication. Sci. Technol. Inf. 2016, 6, 443–444.
131. Lee, S.M.; Lim, S.b.; Pathak, R.D. Culture and entrepreneurial orientation: A multi-country study. Int. Entrep.
Manag. J. 2011, 7, 1–15. [CrossRef]
132. Rosenbloom, T. Crossing at a red light: Behaviour of individuals and groups. Transp. Res. Part F Trafﬁc
Psychol. Behav. 2009, 12, 389–394. [CrossRef]
133. Sueur, C.; Class, B.; Hamm, C.; Meyer, X.; Pelé, M. Different risk thresholds in pedestrian road crossing
behavior: a comparison of French and Japanese approaches. Accid. Anal. Prev. 2013, 58, 59–63. [CrossRef]
134. Mihet, R. Effects of culture on ﬁrm risk-taking: A cross-country and cross-industry analysis. J. Cult. Econ.
2013, 37, 109–151. [CrossRef]
135. Faria, J.J.; Krause, S.; Krause, J. Collective behavior in road crossing pedestrians: the role of social information.
Behav. Ecol. 2010, 21, 1236–1242. [CrossRef]
136. Archer, D. Unspoken diversity: Cultural differences in gestures. Qual. Sociol. 1997, 20, 79–105. [CrossRef]
137. Petzoldt, T. On the relationship between pedestrian gap acceptance and time to arrival estimates. Accid. Anal.
Prev. 2014, 72, 127–133. [CrossRef]
138. Sun, R.; Zhuang, X.; Wu, C.; Zhao, G.; Zhang, K. The estimation of vehicle speed and stopping distance by
pedestrians crossing streets in a naturalistic trafﬁc environment. Transp. Res. Part F Psychol. Behav. 2015,
30, 97–106. [CrossRef]
139. Johnsson, C.; Laureshyn, A.; De Ceunynck, T. In search of surrogate safety indicators for vulnerable road
users: A review of surrogate safety indicators. Transp. Rev. 2018, 38, 765–785. [CrossRef]
140. Dahlstedt, S. The SARTRE-Tables. Opinions about Trafﬁc and Trafﬁc Safety of Some European Drivers; VTI Report;
VTI: Linköping, Sweden, 1994.
141. Rasouli, A.; Kotseruba, I.; Tsotsos, J.K. Are they going to cross? A benchmark dataset and baseline for
pedestrian crosswalk behavior. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
Workshop, Venice, Italy, 22–29 October 2017; pp. 206–213.
142. Katrakazas, C.; Quddus, M.; Chen, W.H.; Deka, L. Real-time motion planning methods for autonomous
on-road driving: state-of-the-art and future research directions. Transp. Res. Part C Emerg. Technol. 2015,
60, 416–442. [CrossRef]
143. Mahadevan, K.; Somanath, S.; Sharlin, E.
Communicating awareness and Intent in autonomous
vehicle–pedestrian interaction. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, Montreal, QC, Canada, 21–26 April 2018; p. 429.
144. Urmson, C. Progress in self-driving vehicles. In Frontiers of Engineering: Reports on Leading-Edge Engineering
from the 2014 Symposium; National Academy of Engineering: Washington, DC, USA, 2015.

--- Page 24 ---
Sustainability 2019, 11, 6713
24 of 24
145. Fox, C.; Camara, F.; Markkula, G.; Romano, R.; Madigan, R.; Merat, N. When should the chicken cross the
road?: Game theory for autonomous vehicle–human interactions. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Vehicle Technology and Intelligent Transport Systems, Funchal, Madeira, Portugal, 27 March
2018; Volume 1, pp. 431–439.
146. Doric, I.; Frison, A.K.; Wintersberger, P.; Riener, A.; Wittmann, S.; Zimmermann, M.; Brandmeier, T. A novel
approach for researching crossing behavior and risk acceptance: The pedestrian simulator. In Proceedings
of the Adjunct 8th International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular
Applications, Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 24–26 October 2016; pp. 39–44.
147. Feldstein, I.; Dietrich, A.; Milinkovic, S.; Bengler, K. A Pedestrian Simulator for Urban Crossing Scenarios.
IFAC-PapersOnLine 2016, 49, 239–244. [CrossRef]
148. Palmeiro, A.R.; van der Kint, S.; Vissers, L.; Farah, H.; de Winter, J.C.; Hagenzieker, M. Interaction between
pedestrians and automated vehicles: A Wizard of Oz experiment. Transp. Res. Part F Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav.
2018, 58, 1005–1020. [CrossRef]
149. Rothenbücher, D.; Li, J.; Sirkin, D.; Mok, B.; Ju, W. Ghost driver: A ﬁeld study investigating the interaction
between pedestrians and driverless vehicles. In Proceedings of the 25th IEEE international symposium
on robot and human interactive communication (RO-MAN), New York, NY, USA, 22–27 August 2016;
pp. 795–802.
150. Löcken, A.; Wintersberger, P.; Frison, A.K.; Riener, A. Investigating User Requirements for Communication
Between Automated Vehicles and Vulnerable Road Users. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE Intelligent
Vehicles Symposium (IV), Paris, France, 9–12 June 2019; pp. 879–884.
151. Madigan, R.; Nordhoff, S.; Fox, C.; Ezzati Amini, R.; Louw, T.; Wilbrink, M.; Schieben, A.; Merat., N.
Understanding interactions between automated road transport systems and other road users. Transp. Res.
Part F Trafﬁc Psychol. Behav. 2019, 66, 196–213. [CrossRef]
152. Keferböck, F.; Riener, A. Strategies for negotiation between autonomous vehicles and pedestrians. In Mensch
und Computer 2015–Workshopband; De Gruyter Oldenbourg: Stuttgart, Germany, 2015.
c⃝2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
